Ref. Ares(2026)1125858 - 01/02/2026

    EU’s next long-term budget (MFF)

                                       Public consultation
                                                 Statement
                Free Software Foundation Europe (FSFE)

With this written statement we provide feedback to:

EU's next long-term budget (MFF) - EU funding for competitiveness,
EU's next long-term budget (MFF) - EU funding for cross-border educa-
tion,training and solidarity, youth, media, culture, and creative sectors,
values, and civil society,
EU's next long-term budget (MFF) - EU funding for civil protection, pre-
paredness and response to crises,
EU's next long-term budget (MFF) - EU funding for the single market, and
cooperation between national authorities.

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                         1
MFF AND STRATEGIC PRIORITIES

    With the MFF “the Commission aims to create a simpler, more focused,
and responsive budget that reflects European strategic priorities”. One of
these priorities is digital and technological sovereignty. To achieve this
sovereignty, Free Software, also known as Open Source Software, is indis-
pensable.

WHAT IS FREE SOFTWARE?

    The core principles of Free Software (also known as Open Source) are
easy to explain: it refers to software that grants everyone the right to
use, study, share, and improve the programme for any purpose. When a
licence grants users these four freedoms, the software is considered Free
Software. In contrast, software that does not fully provide one or more of
these freedoms is referred to as "proprietary" software. Recognised lists
of licences are maintained by the Free Software Foundation 1 (FSF), the
Open Source Initiative2 (OSI), and the Debian Project3.

    In the following text, the term "Free Software" is used, which is com-
monly synonymous with "Open Source".

DIGITAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL SOVEREIGNTY

    Digital and technological sovereignty means being able to use, modify
and substitute technologies independently, securely, and with full con-
trol. Free Software is central to ensuring long-term self-determination,
transparency, and the ability to act. With Free Software, all necessary
resources can be procured independently, and new requirements can be
1   https://www.gnu.org/licenses/license-list.html.en
2   https://opensource.org/licenses
3   https://wiki.debian.org/DFSGLicenses

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      2
met quickly.

   Digital and technological sovereignty empowers the state by providing
solutions that are neither platform- nor device-dependent. A crucial
aspect is the ability to run software on premise hardware, tailored to spe-
cific needs, without relying on a single vendor. Early proceedings under
the Digital Markets Act reveal how far there still is to go: for example,
Apple smartphone and tablet users are currently unable to install altern-
ative app stores due to Apple's role as a gatekeeper. Similar lock-in
mechanisms exist throughout many proprietary ecosystems. By consist-
ently adopting and procuring open standards, open interfaces, and Free
Software, these lock-ins can be avoided and bypassed.

   This approach is essential for interoperability—both within public
administration and in collaboration with external partners. It enables the
seamless exchange of data, improves cooperation between institutions
and international partners, and reduces the burden on third-party organ-
isations and all users of digital technology. Applications must be made
available platform-independently, allowing them to be used without rely-
ing on proprietary vendors. This also ensures that users are not forced to
accept restrictive terms of service, additional usage conditions, or the
surrender of personal data.

Transparency and Trust
   Trust in technology plays a crucial role in digitalisation, ensuring public
acceptance. Transparency, security, and especially the protection of per-
sonal data processed are key factors in determining whether people
choose to use a technology or not. Transparent code makes it possible to
understand how legal requirements in the area of data protection are
implemented, thereby enabling this trust to be established. Applications
used in core infrastructure must remain under control. Free Software
enhances capabilities in IT and strengthens the resilience of IT infrastruc-
tures.

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      3
Resilient Supply Chains
   The open nature of Free Software makes it widely accessible and
widely used. However, this openness can also lead to increasingly com-
plex supply chains, which pose security challenges. The sheer volume of
projects means that components are often integrated into new projects,
which in turn depend on other projects. As a result, security vulnerabilit-
ies can be difficult to track due to the existence of multiple versions in
circulation. Additionally, dependencies may arise on projects that are no
longer maintained or do not meet evolving needs.

   To address this challenge, the FSFE has advocated in the Cyber Resili-
ence Act (CRA) debate to align legislation with these realities. The intro-
duction of an exemption for Free Software and the Steward role reflects
this understanding. During implementation, it is now important to
provide targeted support wherever support is needed, and to demand
support where stakeholders build on and benefit from the preliminary
work of third parties who are not manufacturers. This is also in the state's
own interest, as the state will inevitably assume various roles within the
Free Software ecosystem— e.g. as a Steward and as a Manufacturer. Fur-
thermore, the mandated Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) will provide
greater transparency regarding software dependencies, allowing for a
more precise approach to addressing vulnerabilities and risks. The imple-
mentation phase of the CRA will therefore be crucial in shaping the future
of the Free Software ecosystem and determining the roles Europe will
play within it. The ultimate goal must be to hold those accountable who
significantly profit from Free Software, while simultaneously ensuring that
sovereign, independent, and controllable alternatives receive appropriate
support from both state actors and the market itself. Thus, the MFF
should reflect this and also contribute to a more secure Free Software
ecosystem.

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      4
STATUS QUO: LOCK-IN

   The EU’s digital strategy, tech sovereignty and a competitive European
IT market can only reach its full potential if it systematically focuses on
Free Software. For this the MFF needs to make sure that public funds are
allocated efficiently. Software freedom must be consistently supported
with sustainable, long-term funding. This includes a focus on Micro-enter-
prises and SME as well as funding for scientific research and innovation.
Thus the MFF should allow open calls and other means of support like
sponsorships and a cascade funding system. Also it should reflect focus
on European values when supporting IT, values that promote privacy,
security, diversity in opinion and participation, as well as freedom of
choice in the digital sphere, among others.

   Funding systems like the NGI could lead as example. An impact study
finds that NGI projects have been immensely positive in providing fund-
ing and technical support for a diverse range of open projects, and in fos-
tering an internet ecosystem that respects digital rights, promotes sus-
tainability, and upholds EU legislation and values. However, NGI is was
not designed as sustainable, long-term funding opportunity.

   This is a problem in particular because large parts of our infrastructure
are based on these projects, as they guarantee the necessary independ-
ence and resilience. Cancelling funding means curtailing our own
autonomy.

   Public money is therefore more important than ever to support Free
Software alternatives in internet infrastructure. It is impossible to achieve
Device Neutrality, and a free and open internet without the public sec-
tor’s commitment to maintaining a vigorous and sustainable ecosystem
of viable and real-life tested software alternatives that can disentrench
gatekeepers.

   Dependency on individual proprietary providers hamper sovereignty in
the realm of digital infrastructures. Proprietary software does not allow

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      5
control over the core systems of our digital infrastructure. Without the
manufacturer, it is impossible to modify the software. This becomes par-
ticularly critical in the event of security incidents or the insolvency of the
provider, leading to an erosion of trust in the state's ability to act in the
digital sphere. In the day-to-day operations proprietary software proves
to be an obstacle as well, as it cannot be adapted to specific needs.
Instead, the software primarily serves the economic interests of the man-
ufacturer, who may be targeting entirely different markets, rather than
the strategic and technical objectives of the EU. In proprietary environ-
ments, interoperability is often limited to the manufacturer’s own ecosys-
tem. Open standards and open interfaces are largely absent.

   Research indicates that governments and public administrations con-
tribute up to 27% of software vendors’ revenue. However, this revenue is
predominantly generated by proprietary software from large technology
companies outside Europe. Hyper-scalers act like a magnet, uniting more
and more services and driving more and more users into vendor lock-ins.
European companies that rely on Free Software could make a decisive
difference and enable greater independence, but they often do not gain
sufficient traction due to a lack of strategic support within the MFF.

   While awareness is growing in Europe that Free Software is essential
for achieving digital sovereignty, concrete efforts remain too hesitant or
are entirely absent.

     THE PATH TO DIGITAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL
     SOVEREIGNTY THROUGH FREE SOFTWARE

   To successfully counteract the proprietary lock-in effects through Free
Software, a fundamental understanding of its possibilities and unique
characteristics is essential. The four freedoms—using the software for
any purpose, studying and understanding the code, modifying the soft-
ware, and sharing it as desired—are guaranteed by any Free Software

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      6
licence. Unlike proprietary software, no public funds need to be spent on
usage licences. Instead, the EU must focus on tenders, funding pro-
grammes and procurement for development, maintenance, operation
and support.

   Free Software is everywhere, used by everyone, and distributed by all
—from billion-dollar corporations to SMEs, non-profit organisations,
foundations, public administrations, and individuals. The development of
code is primarily driven by SMEs, industry foundations, and large corpor-
ations working hand in hand to integrate Free Software components into
their organisations and products. These components are found in our
cars, refrigerators, televisions, and state infrastructure. In this process,
all stakeholders can independently decide which competencies they wish
to develop for various components. The MFF should                                               therefore also
ensure that those who benefit from Free Software also contribute, not
only state actors. Instead of widely substituting, the MFF should focus on
stimulating and supporting where there are gaps. For this a close connec-
tion to all relevant stakeholders, in particular civil society actors, is
needed, allowing oversights and checks and balances. Potential funds
thus should reflect market realities and make sure that those who benefit
are also contributing.

PUBLIC MONEY? PUBLIC CODE!

   Many of the advantages mentioned can be leveraged, and most of the
challenges addressed, if future EU budget strategically aims to promote
digital and technological sovereignty through Free Software. The principle
of “Public Money? Public Code!” must be established as a guiding prin-
ciple: Code procured or supported with public funds must be made avail-
able under a Free Software licence, for example, via code.europa.eu.
Instead of further entrenching dependence on individual vendors, Free
Software must be supported and procured. It is essential to acquire soft-
ware that can be adapted to specific needs and that ensures full control

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      7
over digital infrastructures—also in the long term. If software is suppor-
ted or procured that does not meet these criteria, this must be publicly
justified in writing and audited by the Court of Auditors. By making soft-
ware available on code.europa.eu, administrations can support, procure,
customise, and deploy software ad hoc, without lengthy procurement
processes. This not only helps maintain government operational capabil-
ity during (IT) crises but also contributes to reducing bureaucracy in pub-
lic procurement while fostering the European IT market.

   Cross-border collaborations can be leveraged to develop digitally sov-
ereign alternatives, ultimately leading to medium- and long-term cost
savings. Free Software is designed with users in mind—rather than pro-
curing proprietary software filled with unnecessary features that are not
needed, Free Software support and procurement ensures that innovative
solutions are tailored to actual needs and requirements.

   With the implementation of the Interoperable Europe Act but also when
reforming the procurement system, it will be crucial to align the MFF as
well as processes and regulations to genuinely enable and stimulate
interoperability and cross-border collaboration through open standards
and interfaces without harming the Free Software ecosystem. Secure,
innovative technology emerges through collaboration and cooperation.

   Existing financial resources and the EU budget should be strategically
directed toward Free Software, ensuring sustainable innovation, strength-
ening Europe’s IT sector, and benefiting society as a whole. Additionally,
migration plans toward Free Software must be developed from a strategic
perspective, with viable alternatives built and deployed. Users should be
actively involved in these efforts via code.europa.eu.

   Finally, establishing alternative solutions strengthens the negotiating
position in procurement processes—even when dealing with large com-
panies that have historically held dominant market positions and used
them to set prices on their own terms.

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      8
FREE SOFTWARE AS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR SOCIETY

   The consistent pursuit of the “Public Money? Public Code!” principle,
the targeted implementation of the Interoperable Europe Act (IEA) and
the Cyber Resilience Act (CRA), as well as the allocation of resources to
Free Software, bring spill-over effects that benefit the state, the eco-
nomy, and society beyond the direct advantages already mentioned.
Resilient and trustworthy software supports journalists in their work,
enhances transparency and control, and ensures compliance with legal
requirements, particularly in areas such as privacy and data protection.
Free Software can also enable and strengthen participation in the digital
age—for instance, through applications like Consul or Decidim, which
help integrate citizens into decision-making processes, or by reducing
barriers and designing programs and services inclusively. Such projects in
particular require active support, including exploring unconventional
funding mechanisms—as demonstrated by the City of Munich, which has
supported Free Software initiatives through sponsorship programmes.

Market effects
   Studies show that the consistent procurement and investments into
Free Software leads to an increase in business start-ups and employment
in the sector, particularly among small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs) in local regions. In addition to strengthening the SME sector, Free
Software drives innovation and research while enabling young people to
develop deep technical expertise and a self-determined approach to
technology from an early age.

Sustainable Education for the Professionals of Tomorrow
   In the education sector in particular, the focus should not be on
product training but rather on teaching fundamental technological skills,
underlying concepts, and the ability to shape technology. This approach
helps spark interest early on, develop digital competencies, and address
the long-term shortage of skilled professionals.

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      9
   It is important to prevent students from being forced into the ecosys-
tems of proprietary manufacturers, with their restrictions and lock-in
effects, through school policies and the use of proprietary software in
education. Students should have the freedom to use software of their
choice for school-related tasks—without being forced to accept propriet-
ary licences or being prevented from installing alternative Free Software
applications that could enhance productivity and improve learning out-
comes.

   Schools should be supported in the implementation of a future digital
education strategy that utilises Free Software as a working tool and is
aimed at the sovereign use of technology. Extracurricular learning pro-
grammes of this kind should also be promoted in view of the shortage of
skilled workers, especially in the municipal sector.

   An EU budget that focuses on Free Software will generate positive spill-
over effects, fostering expertise and skills development, addressing the
shortage of skilled workers, and enabling innovation across the European
Union.

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                    10