Ref. Ares(2026)1225612 - 03/02/2026

EU Call for Evidence: Towards European Open
Digital Ecosystems
Contribution from The openIMIS Initiative

Background: The openIMIS Initiative
openIMIS - The Digital Public Good for Universal Health Coverage and Universal
Social Protection

openIMIS is a digital public good which powers versatile solutions for the
management of health financing and social protection programs. It can be easily
configured to support various workflows across the social protection delivery
chain. Designed to be interoperable with other information systems, openIMIS
draws upon and contributes to Digital Public Infrastructure. More than 36 Mio
beneficiaries in 14 countries (Tanzania, Cameroon, The Gambia, DR Congo, Chad,
Mauretania, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Burundi, Bangladesh, Lao PDR, São Tomé and
Príncipe, and Niue) benefit from social protection programs (health insurance,
employment injury insurance, cash transfer and voucher schemes, beneficiary
registries) managed using openIMIS.

The global openIMIS initiative is co-financed by the German Ministry for Economic
Development and Cooperation (BMZ), the Swiss Agency for Development and
Cooperation (SDC) and the European Commission (EU). Country-specific
implementations of the software in LMICs are funded partly by country
governments with support through 8 different donors and realised by multi- and
bilateral organisations such as ILO, WB, UNICEF, UNOPS, Enabel (Belgium), Expertise
France, GIZ (Germany); NGOs, private health insurances and others. About 23
private sector developer teams from 19 countries are working at openIMIS
implementations at different stages in more than 21 countries, alongside the IT
teams of the respective health and social protection agencies.

Feedback to the Questions of Interest
1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-
   source sector? What are the main barriers that hamper ...
(i) ... adoption and maintenance of high-quality and secure open source

Strenghts:
Europe has many dedicated software developers who understood the importance
of open source and who were able to develop a business model around it. The
advantages of the freedom in FOSS is very much appreciated and seen as an
enabler – as opposed to the restrictions and very limiting licence conditions of
proprietary software. In the openIMIS Initiative we were able to source several
companies in public, international tenders that had extensive experience with
FOSS development and were able to carry the project.

Weaknesses:

European deciders in politics, IT management and also end-users became used
to the convenience of getting free or cheap non-FOSS US platform offerings. The
understandable urge for trendy, up to date and shiny software that works without
disruptions created a dreadful dependency from powerful US providers that
quickly dominated the international market. The complexity of a comprehensive
evaluation of different product offerings oftentimes creates near-religious feelings
without factual basis among deciders about the usefulness of commercial
products (e.g. Apple versus Windows on workstations). Aspects of prestige and the
general feeling that expensive is always better inevitable leads to feelings of being
at the lower end of the life if the software is for free – lobbyist for commercial
software might have fuelled these feelings even more. IT managers face immense
pressure to go with mainstream solutions as failure will be tolerated more easily
with a market-proven solution. This inevitably creates monopolies in favour of the
strongest competitor and led to the decline of European software solutions: e.g.
the now open-sourced LibreOffice package originated from the German
StarOffice, which was the preferred choice of German industries in the 1990ies but
eventually lost against the overwhelming competition from Microsoft.

European deciders especially at the political level lack a basic understanding of
digital economies and therefor do not understand the value of data as a resource
in value chains for the creation and sale of knowledge products. Equally the
dangers of monopolistic dependencies (e.g. vendors lock in in software and
platforms) are not understood from their technical nature by most. The few light-
house projects of FOSS based digital administrations were therefore initiated
mainly from a costing perspective (e.g. Schwäbisch Hall) and oftentimes only
followed through half-heartedly or even discarded after a democratic change of
leadership (e.g. LiMUX)

This is in sharp contrast to the experiences the openIMIS Initiative has made with
implementation projects in Low-and-Middle-Income countries across the globe:
of course, the cost aspect is a major factor, but the fear of loosing national control
and data to global providers is prevailing, maybe out of historical experience.
FOSS is clearly seen as an advantage to build local competences and to maintain
ownership and legal control of all aspects of their national Digital Public
Infrastructure (DPI).

(ii) ... sustainable contributions to open-source communities

Strengths:

Europe has many dedicated software developers who understood the importance
of open source and co-creation as a lever for powerful collection of software tools.
A very powerful and strong mix of organisations especially around Academia and
Start-Ups have recognized the value of FOSS as a means to start their projects on
a much higher level, allowing them to focus on their core-business and final
products, may it be scientific publications or online services based on open-
source platforms. Especially academic institutions have worked with an open-
source mindset from the beginning by “standing on the shoulders of giants”.

As openIMIS, we were able to able to profit from this existing open-source
infrastructure for the development of the openIMIS software, but also from the
learnings from successful examples of other open-source products in our sectors
(health & social protections) such as DHIS2 from the University of Oslo.

Weaknesses:

There is a general lack of understanding at the political level that digital
infrastructure is a public responsibility which goes beyond regulating data
protection and system security. Although even commercial application systems
are heavily based on FOSS products, there is still a general feeling that these
products are there by gods grace or the because of the free work of pizza-eating
nerds without a life. The bottom-up nature of FOSS ecosystems is not understood
in a political environment that is used to prestigious top-down mega projects that
consume high volumes of public budget. There is need for sustainable public
funding structures for digital infrastructure: hardware, connectivity, FOSS, data
standards. Europe has to develop new mechanisms to manage and nurture very
divers European digital ecosystems that ask for decentralized and modular
system approaches.

We have worked and experienced such environments in the openIMIS Initiative
especially in the interaction with other digital players in the global digital health
ecosystem in co-operation with other FOSS communities such as DHIS2, OpenMRS,
Bahmni or OpenLMIS and communities that co-create data exchange standards
and architecture blueprints for digital architectures such as HL7 FHIR for health
data, the Digital Convergence Initiative (DCI) for social protection data or the
GovStack Initiative for digital governmental services.

2. What is the added value of open source for the public and
   private sectors? Please provide concrete examples,
   including the factors (such as cost, risk, lock-in, security,
   innovation, among others) that are most important to
   assess the added value.

Any digital application today is already making use of FOSS to a large extent:
every mobily phone is running an operating system based on Linux. Every large
software vendor and cloud platform provider is incorporating open-source
components into their product and contributes code enhancements back to FOSS
projects. With FOSS embedded even into practically all small IoT and network
devices, the entire digital backbone of todays world is running on open-source
software: there is no way denying the benefits of open source in all aspects in
todays world as they have already been proven superior in a harsh global
economy. Securing, nurturing and regulating the ecosystem in a beneficial way is
the task of todays governments to protect their digital public infrastructure and
protect their citizens from harm.

The openIMIS Initiative has proven these benefits in the ten years of her existence
through several implementation projects. We were also able to benefit from the
vast experience of other partner communities in our sector, such as DHIS2,
OpenMRS and OpenLMIS and other partners that are active in e.g. the Digital
Square Global Goods Initiative. The most obvious benefits and mechanisms in our
community experience are

   •   Innovation through open community structures, freely available essential
       resources & documentations, and a welcoming community with a shared
       vision and understanding of the power of co-creation. We achieve this
       through active community management that gives only a moderating role
       to the GIZ hosted co-ordination desk and outsources code development
       and maintenance in public tenders. Technical teams and developers from
       new implementations are actively approached and encouraged to join the
       regular community calls and are also being recommended to other
       international implementation funders for new projects.
   •   Shared cost of feature enhancement through contributions from on-site
       teams is possible through the open community in combination with a
       copy-left license for the resulting software product. This paves the way for a
       diverse funder base for new implementation projects and also for
       contributions to the maintenance of the global product. Funders can be
       sure to invest into a digital good that is publicly available for everybody
       instead of investing into singular project islands that were created out of
       short-sighted donor interests and driven by commercial software vendors
       who will most certainly create a vendor lock-in.
   •   Risk reduction with regards to software quality in all aspects is vastly
       enhanced by having openly visible code for a multi-eye code verification
       and also by crowdsourcing e.g. user acceptance tests (UAT) to members of
       the wider community, which includes e.g. universities that use openIMIS as
       part of their curriculum and engage students into the regular UAT activities.
   •   Risk reduction with an eye on the sustainability of the software product
       and the continuity of development and community processes is enabled
       through a multi-funder and multi-expert community on the one hand, and
       the use of open repositories for code and documentation. If one funder
       breaks away there are still others to step in. The selection of platforms and
       all tools that are used in the community was done with the worst-case
       scenario in mind: if due to some global emergency all funders break away
       and the co-ordination desk would cease to exist, the code, all
       documentation & knowledge products and all the community channels will
       remain openly available. The vast community of experts will have all
       necessary means to continue the work and create new funding structures
       to maintain at least minimal operations. Of course, they will be forced to
       come up with a new co-ordinating structure, but there will be no legal
       barrier keeping them from doing so. If on the other hand a commercial
       provider collapses, this normally means the end of the software product.

3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU
   level to support the development and growth of the EU
   open-source sector and contribute to the EU’s
   technological sovereignty and cybersecurity agenda?

Support digital infrastructure that can be fully owned and controlled by the
legislative bodies in the region that are covered by digital systems. The
democratically legitimized representatives of the ultimate owner of the data – the
citizen - must always be in full control. This touches all aspects of ownership of the
tools and platforms with the aim of being able to physically shut off illegal data
access and abusive systems in a worst-case scenario. Drawing from the
experience of the openIMIS Initiative in co-creating a DPG with international
partners at all levels, we see the importance of and have experience in managing
the following measures:
   •   Support sustainable co-creation environments for modular FOSS products
       as digital public goods (DPGs) that can be shared among EU and other
       entities as building blocks for localized digital public infrastructure (DPI) and
       allow local customizations without legal limitation by intellectual property
       right owners.
   •   Support architecture frameworks for digital public infrastructure such as
       GovStack that allow for a smooth integration of DPGs
   •   Support the development of domain specific interoperability standards
       such as HL7 FHIR (Health) or Digital Convergence Initiative (DCI – Social
       Protection) to facility compatible modular development based on defined
       data exchange standards.
   •   Ensure diversified and sustainable funding streams to maintain a
       continuous lifeline of the above points.

4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why?

Understanding the citizen as the owner of digital public infrastructure in a
democracy, a citizen centric viewpoint is mandatory to define priority levels for
technical development. From our learnings in many implementation scenarios of
openIMIS based social protection systems world-wide we can see the following
levels of dependency when building citizen centric applications as DPI:

   •   Priority 1: intimate citizen date such as identity and family relations
   •   Priority 2: foundational applications around citizen-oriented services such
       as financial transactions and civil registration.
   •   Priority 3: domain specific applications in a DPI to support specific sectors
       such as health, social protection, education, trade etc

5. In what sectors could an increased use of open source
   lead to increased competitiveness and cyber resilience?

The biggest obstacle of European co-operation is at the same her biggest
chance: the diversity in languages, legal frameworks and cultural backgrounds
requires co-creation processes that are more advanced than those in very
homogenous ecosystems as they exist e.g. in the US or the British Commonwealth.
Europeans have quite some experience opening borders for trade and travel and
setting up frameworks that work across borders. Translating this to the
development and use of digital products, Europe is in a very good positions to
leverage this experience for the harmonisation of digital application that require
cross border data exchange and sharing. Essential sectors are health and social
protection systems that cover the needs of a trans-national workforce where
citizens move freely between countries and need to access services from health
and social protection systems of several countries in parallel.

Leveraging these experiences creates blueprints for other transnational
economies world-wide that give European companies and solutions a unique
selling point globally. Already existing initiatives like the European Health Data
Space are examples that are being closely observed by the international
community. In our work with the openIMIS Initiative we experience the momentum
that comes from a diverse developer community in these sectors in our daily work.

At the same time health and social protection systems touch the most intimate
data of individuals and households which requires an special security and
confidentiality levels. Building transparent platforms within Europe based on FOSS
and open standards removes dependencies from e.g. US based services and
gives each member country the freedom to decide individually to which extend
they want to buy into a European Infrastructure or own the building blocks
nationally.