Ref. Ares(2026)1221696 - 03/02/2026

Cologne, 3 February 2026

              Open-Xchange’s contribution to the Commission’s call for evidence
                                  on European open digital ecosystems

        Open-Xchange, as the leading European open-source software company in the email and
DNS space and the service provider of choice for some of the biggest Internet access providers in
Europe, would like to thank the Commission for the opportunity to participate in its call for evidence
for an initiative towards European open digital ecosystems.
        We will structure our contribution in three parts. We will start by addressing some of the
Commission’s questions, providing an analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the European
open digital ecosystem. We will then expose proposals for a comprehensive support strategy,
discussing objectives, principles, instruments, and priorities. Finally, we will devote specific
attention to how to reconcile the global nature of open-source software with the need to guarantee
Europe’s digital autonomy.

        I – Analysis

        Why open source
        The open-source paradigm is a natural choice for Europe.
         Open source and open standards enable horizontal cooperation. Even if the
construction of a single digital market is underway, the European Union is still an archipelago of
countries, languages, jurisdictions, bureaucracies, and cultures. Indeed, this is reflected in the fact
that it has not generally produced large digital champions that operate across the Union, but rather
many SMEs and local organisations that act as national champions and excellence hubs. The
growth of a single digital market requires federating all these smaller national players on
equal terms. This is only possible if there are neutral, open, free interfaces, protocols, and
standards that everyone can use without contracts, licenses, or fees. The ecosystem becomes
much more efficient when players can share the workload: each produces a part of the overall
platform and uses the parts made by others, thanks to an open licensing model.
        Proprietary software may be necessary and useful in multiple situations; even open-source
companies often produce proprietary extensions and customisations to support their revenue and
cover the costs of developing the open-source codebase. Still, if applied generally, the
proprietary model reproduces the very dependence we want to get rid of; it grants a single
for-profit entity ownership of basic technologies and tools that everyone else needs, allowing it to
exploit any significant market position it manages to build. Open source also enables
competition, innovation and change, strongly reducing the constraining power of successful
vendors.
2026 © by Open-Xchange AG. This document is released under the Creative
Commons BY-ND-4.0 International license. Open-Xchange and the Open-
Xchange logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of Open-Xchange AG.
All other company and/or product names may be trademarks or registered
trademarks of their owners. Information contained in this document is subject
to change without notice.
       Problems
        Market access is possibly the biggest problem for European open-source
companies. The case depends strongly on the specific product and niche; however, whenever the
European product falls in direct competition with an offering by one or more global big tech
companies, European products – even when of similar or superior quality to the global offerings
– are at a disadvantage because of existing market dominance, contract entrenchment, anti-
competitive practices, and vendor lock-in. Regulatory efforts are commendable, but their
enforcement is uncertain and slow, and they cannot influence the market in the short term. The
only possible instrument is industrial policy, and we will build on this in the next section.
       Funding is a major issue for European open-source companies. The availability of
venture capital is much lower than in the United States, and it often focuses on low-risk initiatives
more than on ambitious, disruptive innovation. Investments would be necessary to fill the quality
and feature gap that sometimes exists between European and global products, but European
investors are wary of placing a bet on the ability of a local company to capture significant market
share against a dominant big tech player.
         Moreover, a significant part of the open-source ecosystem is not managed by for-profit
entities, but by non-profit organisations, universities and individuals. Specific funding models
need to be developed to ensure the sustainability of foundational projects that are run as a
non-profit endeavour but are widely used. At the same time, for open-source software to become
the foundation of European IT at the user application level as well, many open-source products
must complete the evolution from volunteer and academic efforts to industrial and commercial
activities. Marketing, user experience design, organisational excellence, and business
model development are areas that open-source projects often need to address with more
attention.

       II – Proposals
        A comprehensive strategy to support the European open digital ecosystem should be very
clear in its objectives and principles, ensuring that all instruments and action priorities are
aligned. We will thus break down our proposals in order.

       Objectives
       The overall objective of the strategy should be to grow of the European digital industry
through the use of open paradigms. Just as Europe is the global leader in digital regulation, it
can successfully become the global leader in open digital technologies.
       Such an objective could be quantitatively expressed and measured in terms of job places,
overall revenues, and tax revenue that are generated by open-source companies and
organisations in Europe.
        Open licenses and standards should become the default model for European
technologies developed with public funding or purchased by public administrations. This
objective could be measured by assessing the share of IT purchases and projects that use open
technologies and licensing models.

Open-Xchange
                                                 2
         Principles
         Europe should adopt the Internet’s open architecture as a reference model for online
services. Technical principles such as modularity and interoperability should become
requirements in the design of applications and services used and promoted by European
institutions. For data storage and transmission, applications should be required to adopt open
protocols and formats. Deviations from these principles should need to be technically justified.
       Whenever software and services are funded with public money, the results should
be released under open licenses. Indeed, institutions should be required to verify whether open
products are already available before funding the development of new ones. Open-source products
should also be preferred in public procurement.
       To support the objective of establishing European leadership, the benefits of European
public investments in open technologies should be directed to European citizens, entities,
companies, and economies, as far as possible. At the same time, the global nature of the open
development model implies that the rest of the world will continue to participate in the projects
enabled by these investments and benefit from them. The open-source model makes
supporting our local ecosystem not an adversarial action towards the rest of the world. Still,
we should not be afraid to pursue our own interests, as all other countries already do.

         Instruments
         We propose to base the strategy on two basic pillars.
      The first pillar is an industrial policy supporting European open technologies. A “buy
European, buy open” policy should be introduced1.
        As a priority, public purchases and funding should be directed to companies that pay
taxes and create jobs in Europe, whether European or not; additional requirements on the
ownership, place of business, and applicable jurisdiction of suppliers, preventing
interference from foreign powers, should be introduced whenever services relate to national
security or are vital to the functioning of the economy and society. For this kind of service,
European vendors should be required; in all other cases, even without a strict requirement, the
extent of the economic fallout in Europe of each vendor should be assessed and should be one of
the criteria when awarding the contract.
       Additionally, priority should generally be given to software and services implemented
with open-source code; again, this could become a requirement whenever the additional
transparency, extensibility, and third-party reuse are beneficial to the specific purpose. A minimum
open-source software quota that increases over time could create a natural push for vendors
to reconsider their licensing models and invest in open technology development.
      In all cases, even when implemented in proprietary software, the use of open standards,
protocols and formats should be mandated whenever possible.

1 We also defer to our contribution to the call for evidence on the review of public procurement directives for a more

detailed analysis of the “buy European, buy open” policy proposal.

Open-Xchange
                                                            3
       Regulatory action should also be part of this first pillar, intervening whenever the
growth of European alternatives to dominant players is encumbered by their anti-competitive
actions or by pushback and manipulation against the open standards of choice; this can also
include intervention in standardisation processes.
        The Commission should also lead by example and urgently adopt European open-
source applications and open standards for its own procurement and activities. The
Commission’s continued use of proprietary, non-European applications and formats weakens the
credibility of its efforts.
        The second pillar is a public investment fund for European sovereign technologies to
cover projects that the market fails to support. While the first pillar of the policy is likely to
stimulate private investment in this kind of project by providing a market, the urgency of the current
situation makes it advisable to supplement market dynamics with immediate public investment.
        The criteria for target projects should include foundational, non-profit building blocks
and infrastructure that are widely used but for which no individual entity has a reason to sponsor
them entirely on its own. They should also include moonshots and long-term, ambitious, wide-
scale projects that fail to attract private venture capital because of the risk, or that need seed
money to reach a point where they can do so. Finally, they should include the integration of
multiple open-source products from smaller companies that could constitute an alternative to
global offerings if combined, but that the companies themselves cannot merge due to commercial
or financial issues. Part of this fund could also be used as venture capital to help scale
promising European companies that could become continental champions in a key sector.
        The fund should be managed proactively and focus on practical, measurable results.
It should not be a place where people show up with paperwork and receive money, but an entity
that strategically determines the needs it wants to address, identifies people and companies that
can fulfil them, promotes action, and measures the impact of each project in terms of product
adoption and market share. Projects should be selected for their likelihood of producing mass-
scale change in the digital services market. For the same reason, the fund should remain
completely independent of the dominant market players whose projects it could challenge,
even if they offer gifts such as additional funds, free infrastructure, or joint venture opportunities.
        Care should be taken to prevent “open-washing” and “Europe-washing” by global,
proprietary players, and to ensure that the economic returns from investments are concentrated in
Europe. Global participants and projects are welcome, as is cooperation with similar initiatives in
other countries, but jobs, infrastructure, know-how, and fiscal revenue should be created in Europe.
Actually, attracting talent and startups from the rest of the world and getting them
established in Europe in exchange for funding could be a very desirable side effect of the fund.
      As a side objective, a smaller portion of this fund should be used to strengthen the
European open-source community and its role in the global scene.
        For example, an effort should be made to raise the profile and weight of Europe within
global organisations focused on open source and open standards, whether code-supporting
foundations or standardisation and policy-making forums. Europe should support the role and
standing of these organisations as long as they include European leadership and demonstrate
attention for European needs and values; it should instead challenge their role if they show capture
by global players or dominance by foreign interests. The fund should also sponsor community
meetings and education programs within Europe.

Open-Xchange
                                                  4
       As a final consideration, both pillars require that the European institutions build a centre
of competence with people who master high-level skills in technology, product design,
business models, and regulation. These people could act as “public digital strategists”, map out
issues and efforts, and figure out how to act under the first or the second pillar. An institutional
form that allows for quick, simple action, both in hiring appropriate people from the market
and in designing and implementing projects, would be needed for this purpose.

       Priorities
        Europe needs coordinated action to address foreign dependency at all levels of the stack,
from low-level hardware up to everyday online services. While removing dependencies at one
level of the stack is beneficial in itself, digital autonomy can only be achieved when all levels
have been addressed. This condition requires a comprehensive action plan.
       Still, within that action plan, priorities should be established, considering criteria such as
the pervasiveness of the layer and of the specific application, its industrial and economic value,
and other strategic considerations.
        Focusing on the specific technical niches in which we operate, we consider messaging
and productivity software – that is, every employee’s basic set of everyday applications –
to be extremely strategic. This sector is almost entirely in the hands of non-European companies
and implemented through proprietary software; the ubiquitousness of these applications means
that the lack of autonomy and transparency deriving from these two factors creates very high risks,
as the failure or security compromise of office software would affect almost all companies and
organisations in Europe. Additionally, the enormous value of European collective purchases of
productivity software and services represents a significant transfer of wealth from Europe to
economies outside the Union.

       III. Is there anything like “European open source”?
       As a final consideration, we want to devote specific attention to a question that has been
the focus of multiple discussions within Europe’s open-source community.
         To introduce digital autonomy requirements on open-source software, it is necessary to
define whether a specific codebase, or even individual code contributions, “belong” to a specific
country or jurisdiction. This is a conceptually difficult endeavour, as open-source software is
generally developed through global cooperation; it is distributed and reused to such an extent that
tracking contributions becomes difficult. Moreover, while project maintainers could theoretically
restrict contributions according to nationality, the licenses are explicitly designed to prevent any
restriction on the global circulation of code.
       However, we would like to challenge the idea that the factor determining whether some
code is suitable for digital sovereignty is the nationality of the author. The issue rather needs
to be addressed in conjunction with the actual purposes of a sovereignty requirement.
        The sovereignty objectives of a “buy European” policy fall into two big groups. One
is about security: removing the ability of foreign companies or powers to constrain the availability
of software and services in Europe, and ensuring that software does not contain backdoors or
undesirable data processing. The other is about economics: ensuring that the money spent on

Open-Xchange
                                                 5
acquiring the software is reinvested in the European economy rather than drained to other parts of
the world.
        These two objectives do not depend that much on the code itself; they depend much more
on the entity that assembles and maintains the codebase and supplies the final product to
European customers and end-users. So, rather than assessing code or developers, a
“sovereignty check” should assess the suppliers. The strategy of imposing sovereignty
requirements on suppliers (i.e., manufacturers and integrators), rather than on developers, would
be in line with the one already adopted in the Cyber Resilience Act for security requirements; it
would thus represent a natural extension of that model, following similar reasoning. Indeed, since
manufacturers must already ensure the security and availability of their own software supply chain,
they could also be easily responsible for its resilience under geopolitical pressure.
        Suppliers can and should be assessed towards both groups of sovereignty objectives.
However, this assessment will not result in an on-off judgment, but in a position on a
graduated scale. Of course, European open-source entities will generally serve both objectives
well, whereas non-European closed-source entities will not serve either. However, there is a whole
range of cases in the middle. Moreover, depending on the sector and application, one or both the
objectives mentioned above might not be relevant.
        We thus suggest adopting a general-use framework to assess the geopolitical fitness
of suppliers, separately for each of the two objectives above, building on and further
specializing the recent Cloud Sovereignty Framework. For security, factors such as ownership,
management, place of business, applicable jurisdictions, ties with other countries, and foreign
dependencies in the infrastructure or value chain should be considered; for economics, factors
such as taxes paid in Europe, the location of offices, data centres and job places, local re-
investments, and the origin of sub-contractors and intermediate materials should be assessed.
Depending on the application, different thresholds could be set for each of the two factors to
determine a supplier’s eligibility.
         Notwithstanding the numerous pleas to the contrary from foreign global entities, European
institutions should not be afraid to reject non-European suppliers when this is necessary to the
objectives above and when these objectives are paramount. However, in other cases, the
advantages of extended cooperation and additional choice could prevail over sovereignty
considerations. Thus, in our opinion, the correct approach to this problem is to develop
assessment frameworks for each service's sovereignty needs and for each supplier’s
fitness to meet them, and to apply these frameworks in different ways depending on the specific
situation.

       Conclusion
        We appreciate the European Commission's commitment to supporting the European
open digital ecosystem, and we hope we provided useful comments and suggestions. We thank
you for your attention, stand ready to answer any questions you might have, and look forward to
further opportunities to participate in this discussion.

Open-Xchange
                                                6
       About Open-Xchange

        Open-Xchange (OX) is a developer of secure and open communication and office
productivity software, IMAP server software and DNS solutions. Since 2005, it has partnered with
many of the world’s largest Internet Service Providers (ISPs), telcos and carriers to deliver email
and productivity solutions that include secure storage, file and document management. Dovecot is
the world’s most popular IMAP server software and PowerDNS provides secure DNS services to
telco customers and their users worldwide. Software developed by Open-Xchange is used by 220
million people globally. It is headquartered in Cologne, Germany, with further offices in Hamburg,
Nuremberg and Olpe, and international offices in Finland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands and the
USA. For further details, please visit www.open-xchange.com.

       Contact

       For any enquiry about this document please refer to Vittorio Bertola, Head of Policy &
Innovation at Open-Xchange, vittorio.bertola@open-xchange.com .

Open-Xchange
                                                7