Av. des Arts 56, 4C • 1000 Brussels    • Belgium - 03/02/2026
                                                                                 Ref. Ares(2026)1220897

                                                   Web:                          https://apell.info/
                                                   Contact:                        apell@apell.info
                                                   Transparency Register:         765379449482-59

Towards European open digital ecosystems
Feedback by APELL – The European Open
Source Software Business Association
                                                                                   3 February 2026
APELL – The European Open Source Software Business Association and its members re-
present hundreds of Open Source businesses with a collective turnover in the order of several
tens of billions of euros each year, among them mostly SMEs, some large companies, as well
as public administrations, research institutions, and individuals throughout Europe.
Open Source is based on granting the freedoms to use, study, share, and improve tech-
nology based on it. These freedoms are granted by way of an Open Source licence. 90% of
business software projects are based on Open Source 1, Open Source components are pre-
sent in 70-90% of software globally2, and more than 65% of businesses contribute to Open
Source3.
APELL welcomes the Commission’s planned Communication “Towards European open digital
ecosystems”, and to update the Commission’s Open Source strategy. Only Open Source
guarantees full digital sovereignty and therefore realises broader policy objectives of the
European Union before the backdrop of rising international tensions.
Open Source delivers on the objectives of strengthening control over digital infrastructure,
providing users with choice, while reducing dependencies and avoiding vendor lock-in,
increasing interoperability, and allowing users to switch service providers. In addition,
only Open Source products and services provide meaningful, independent influence of the
design of digital technology our society and industry rely on. This is in particular also relevant
in the case of foreign mergers and acquisitions.
The Communication has the potential to leverage the strategic advantage that Open Source
innovation guarantees – and the power of the ecosystem of businesses and developers that
underpin it. This includes improvements to supply chain transparency, reliability, and
compliance, and strengthens Europe’s capacity and capability to boost digital innovation and
global competitiveness.

1 Butler et al., Considerations and challenges for the adoption of open source components in software-
    intensive       businesses,      Journal    of    Systems      and    Software,    186     (2022)
    (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0164121221002442)
2 Nagle et al., Census II of Free and Open Source Software – Application Libraries, Linux Foundation,
    Harvard Laboratory for Innovation Science (LISH) and Open Source Security Foundation
    (OpenSSF), 80 (2022) (https://www.linuxfoundation.org/research/census-ii-of-free-and-open-
    source-software-application-libraries)
3 Blind et al., Estimating the GDP effect of Open Source Software and its complementarities with R&D
    and patents: evidence and policy implications, The Journal of Technology Transfer, 49 (2024)
    (https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10961-023-09993-x)
                                                                                                         2
APELL’s responses to the Commission’s key questions
1. Strengths and weaknesses of the Open Source sector, and existing barriers
The foreseen revision of the public procurement framework is an important lever for the EU to
stimulate open, sustainable innovation. The revision should take into account the specific
characteristics of Open Source business models that differ from proprietary businesses.
Award and selection criteria must prioritise the long-term sustainability of public investment
over price, by giving priority to vendors that are actively contributing to the maintenance of the
chosen Open Source solutions4.
The European ICT sector in general, and Open Source businesses in particular are charac-
terised by a prevalence of start-ups, micro- and SMEs. As such, minimum turnover criteria
and hurdles to forming consortia can constitute barriers.
Restricted access to and availability of standards and specifications, standard-essential pat-
ents, and a lack of meaningful access to and representation of the Open Source ecosystem
in standard-setting bodies can curb Open Source innovation5.
Furthermore, a fragmented funding landscape, and general hurdles in access to funding, as
well as the varying or unclear commitment of governments and authorities in shifting to Open
Source, as well as a varying or unclear level of knowledge of Open Source solutions hamper
Open Source uptake.

2. Added value of Open Source for public and private sectors
Open Source solutions are characterised by the Open Source licence under which they are
developed and distributed. The freedoms granted by the licence and the open development
model allow the free choice of a service provider, and have advantages for reliability and se-
curity (by way of, in particular, transparency, reproducibility, verifiability) over proprietary so-
lutions. Over the last forty years since the start of the movement, Open Source innovation has
created a value estimated at $8.8 trillion6.
The German openDesk7 project is a suite of e-mail, video conferencing, chat, document,
knowledge, and access management on the basis of Open Source products from various
European partners, most of them the original developers or main contributors to those Open
Source projects. OpenDesk already reaches more than 160.000 users8. Managed by a public

4 see APELL’s submission to the evaluation of the public procurement directives, submitted 27 Febru-
    ary 2025: https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/14427-Public-
    procurement-directives-evaluation/F3522562_en          and         https://apell.info/2025/02/20/apell-
    submission-public-procurement-directives-evaluation/
5 see APELL’s submission to the call for evidence for a revision of the Standardisation Framework,
    submitted                    on                    18                    July                    2025:
    https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/14511-Standardisation-
    Regulation-revision/F3581190_en and https://apell.info/2025/07/18/more-openness-in-european-
    standardisation/
6 Hoffmann, Manuel and Nagle, Frank and Zhou, Yanuo, The Value of Open Source Software (Janu-
    ary 1, 2024). Harvard Business School Strategy Unit Working Paper No. 24-038, Available at SSRN:
    https://ssrn.com/abstract=4693148 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4693148
7 openDesk by ZenDiS: https://www.opendesk.eu/en/product
8 “openDesk: Interview mit ZenDiS-Chef Alexander Pockrandt über die Entwicklung”, heise online, 8
    October 2025: https://www.heise.de/hintergrund/openDesk-Interview-mit-ZenDiS-Chef-Alexander-
    Pockrandt-ueber-die-Entwicklung-10733246.html
                                                                                                  3
undertaking, it is primarily available to the public sector, but private sector offers are being
developed by various providers, permitted by the Open Source nature of the solution.
Consul Democracy9 combines various Open Source software into a solution easily employed
by local governments and administrations. As a public sector open source project, it is an ex-
ample of joint development of the public sector with an Open Source project, benefiting from
the advantages of accountability, transparency, and traceability for democratic decision-mak-
ing afforded by the freedoms the Open Source nature grants.
The SEAPATH project10, hosted by Linux Foundation Energy, develops an industrial grade
real-time platform as Open Source, allowing various private sector entities to benefit from
standardisation and commodification through Open Source.

3. Measures and Actions to support development and growth
As a consequence of the smaller size of Open Source providers, solutions are often less
known. APELL recommends to explore actions to increase visibility, e.g. by publishing suc-
cess stories and speaking at sector-specific events, though the establishment of solution ca-
talogues, the creation of buyer networks, and establishing Open Source Programme Of-
fices (OSPOs) throughout Europe as a means to institutionalise Open Source knowledge and
capability. This should be accompanied by instating education programmes for authorities and
procurers, and awareness-raising campaigns for Open Source in the public sector. Addition-
ally, joint development and public sector open source projects11 can increase external, as well
as internal visibility.
Open Source innovation relies on the free and open availability of and access to stand-
ards, specifications, and standard-essential patents. Requirements of membership, or
payment for documentation and standards are not compatible with the open development and
distribution model of Open Source, and must be removed where digital sovereignty goals are
pursued. The Commission and Member States must effectively promote interoperability by
appropriately adapting the legal framework to require free and open access for the Open
Source development and business ecosystem (“enforceable interoperability”).
To counter the fragmented funding landscape, and unclear commitment of governments and
authorities mentioned in above (1. Strengths and weaknesses of the Open Source sector, and
existing barriers), APELL recommends to increase awareness of the benefits of Open Source
for the public and private sector in the funding, investment, and financing landscape, the es-
tablishment of concrete and broad plans for the public procurement of Open Source solutions.
APELL recommends furthermore that binding targets be introduced for the procurement of
Open Source products and services, combined with a constant evaluation and, where ne-
cessary, evolution of such rules. APELL recommends to introduce a minimum of 20% Open
Source with the revision of the public procurement framework, and increase this target
gradually to achieve 100% Open Source procurement by 203512.

9 Consul Democracy: https://consuldemocracy.org/, Platform “Unser München” of the German city of
    Munich: https://unser.muenchen.de/, Platform “Decide_Madrid” of the Spanish capital city of Mad-
    rid: https://decide.madrid.es/
10 LF Energy SEAPATH: https://lfenergy.org/projects/seapath/
11 see the study “Open Source Software Adoption and Reuse in European Local Governments: A
    Multiple-Case Study” published by the Open Source Observatory, 29 September 2025:
    https://interoperable-europe.ec.europa.eu/collection/open-source-observatory-osor/news/multiple-
    case-study-public-sector-open-source
                                                                                                     4
Open Source is an opportunity in education, training, and research, and should be the de-
fault in building skills, and to attract talent in Europe.

4. Technology areas to be prioritised
The development of Open Source projects requires infrastructure, such as hosting, ver-
sion control, bug tracking, feature requests, task management, as well as continuous integ-
ration including build, testing, and publishing environments. This could particularly benefit
public sector open source projects and joint developments across Member States and differ-
ent authorities, and lead to more internal and external visibility and awareness.
In the area of open data and public sector information, access to data must be increased and
made easier by making data available under open, standardised, and commonly used licences
that are compatible with Open Source licencing and development practices. This also
increases legal certainty for partners involved in relevant products and services.
In line with the broader policy objectives of the EU of strengthening capacity and capability
in the digital sector, and increasing global competitiveness, the investment in Open Source
software, Open Source hardware designs and production, and new technologies like Open
Source Artificial Intelligence should be prioritised, and realised e.g. through public sector open
source projects, and by making available, or easing access to, funding for Open Source in-
novators.

5. Sectors that benefit from Open Source
The digital sector already benefits from Open Source, as evidenced by the finding that 90%
of business software projects depend on Open Source1. Producing industries can benefit
from reducing dependencies and vulnerabilities in case of international trade pressure, by
bringing back value creation in-house, and by diversifying investments to Open Source tech-
nology providers. In defence, finance, and health, investments into Open Source particularly
strengthen security and safety, trust, reliability, and reproducibility. The scientific method de-
pends on public availability of research and the possibility to verify, falsify, and reproduce re-
search. In the same vain, research and education benefit from the ease of access to, and
the openness of Open Source technology, and allows for easier pathways of commercialising
developments within an established ecosystem.
As ICT technology is foundational infrastructure across sectors, the overall benefits of in-
creased digital sovereignty through Open Source apply cross-cutting as well. APELL recom-
mends building OSPOs (see above) that can play an important role in institutionalising Open
Source knowledge in all sectors.
The European Union, its Member States, and citizens rely on Open Source as Digital Public
Infrastructure. As such, policy in the EU must be shaped to maintain and contribute to it in the
long-term interest of society, economy, and democracy. In realising its responsibility for the
infrastructure, public authorities and public servants must also be granted the ability to con-
tribute to Open Source projects themselves where this complements public-private coopera-
tion projects by instating source code contribution policies, giving contributors from the
public sector more legal certainty. Where the development of new products and services, or

12 see APELL’s submission to the public consultation on the Cloud and AI Development Act, submitted
    on 3 July 2025: https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/14628-AI-
    Continent-new-cloud-and-AI-development-act/F3571855_en and https://apell.info/2025/07/07/100-
    percent-open-source-by-2035/
                                                                                             5
of improvements, modifications, and customisations are procured, they must be Open Source
by default, following the “Public Money, Public Code”13 principle.
APELL furthermore supports the establishment of a European Sovereign Tech Fund, fol-
lowing the example of the Sovereign Tech Fund in Germany12 to complement other measures

Conclusion
Open Source contributes uniquely to the broader policy objectives of the European Union
across sectors, by increasing control, reducing dependencies, and providing long-term sus-
tainability of public and private investment. The European Union has the opportunity to use
several of the instruments currently under review or in preparation, to stimulate growth of the
Open Source industry and thereby to increase competitiveness and innovative power. By
taking decisive steps in raising awareness for digital sovereignty through Open Source, insti-
tutionalising Open Source knowledge and capability, stimulating Open Source growth through
public procurement, and realising the EU’s and governments’ responsibility to maintain, and
contribute to the Open Source Digital Public Infrastructure the Commission can now leverage
the opportunity and the strategic advantage of Open Source for the benefit of European global
competitiveness.

On behalf of
APELL – Association Professionnelle Européenne du Logiciel Libre ASBL
Sebastian Raible – sebastian.raible@apell.info
Director EU Government Affairs

13 Public Money, Public Code (campaign by the Free Software Foundation Europe):
   https://publiccode.eu/en/
                                                                                                       6

APELL (Association Professionnelle Européenne du Logiciel Libre ASBL) is Europe’s Open Source
Software Business Association. Founded in 2020 to bring national Open Source Software organisa-
tions together into a European network to provide them with peer support and collective marketing,
as well as capacity building and policy support for public affairs, both nationally and on the EU-level.
APELL aims to increase opportunities for the members of the Association’s member organisations,
and to increase value and advancement for customers in both the public and the private sectors. At
the same time, we see a real need to bring the Open Source perspective into the discussions on the
shaping of Europe’s digital future.
We support the digitisation of the economy and society — but it matters how we digitise. APELL
promotes a sovereign, inclusive, ethical digital market. In order to achieve this, Europe’s digital future
should be based on Open.
APELL and its members represent hundreds of Open Source businesses with a collective
turnover in the order of several tens of billions of euros each year, as well as public adminis-
trations, research institutions, and individuals throughout Europe.
Members

Advisory Member