Ref. Ares(2026)983907 - 28/01/2026

HOP's position on the European Open Digital Ecosystem Strategy
Date : January 2026

HOP - Stop Planned Obsolescence is a French environment protection association. Since
2015, it advocates for long-lasting products. It is directly linked to the construction of circular
economy tools such as the repairability and durability indexes as well as the French repair
bonus. It represents a community of more than 60.000 people. HOP is also part of the Right
to Repair campaign's steering group. HOP started in 2025 the "No Windows Tax" campaign
which mobilized 22 organizations to denounce the end of free Windows 10 updates and
raise awareness about software obsolescence.

The end of Windows 10 free security updates

Microsoft announced that the end of free security updates for Windows 10 will take place on
October 14, 2025. This decision pushed users to upgrade to Windows 11. Due to the
multinational’s hardware requirements, 400 million computers worldwide were incompatible
with Windows 11 as of summer 2025, some being only five years old. The estimated
consequences were particularly alarming:

    -​   Economic impacts: over €10.4 billion in additional costs for users to pay for extended
         updates over one year, not including the costs of replacing computers.
    -​   Environmental impacts: the emission of over 70 million tons of CO², the extraction of
         nearly 32,000 Eiffel Towers’ worth of raw materials, and the production of at least
         800,000 tons of electronic waste.

This case also highlighted our collective dependence on non-European digital multinationals.
In response to these challenges, the coalition’s petition won strong public support,
gathering 50,000 signatures in just one month. The campaign demonstrated a
convergence of interests among public, private, and civil society actors in seriously
considering the transition to free and open-source software.

The citizen mobilization secured a concession from Microsoft: eased access to update
extensions until October 2026 in Europe. However, this is an underwhelming victory—this
extension is only a reprieve, and in one year, users will face the same problem again.
Furthermore, Microsoft requires users to log in with an account and does not allow automatic
activation. The company also communicated for nearly nine months about the end of

1
updates, including messages encouraging the replacement of incompatible computers, and
many people had already done so.

Software obsolescence: a recurring problem to restrain

Software obsolescence refers to all software techniques that push for the premature
disposal of equipment. In the case of Windows 10, this encouragement to replace devices
is due to the end of security updates, the lack of user information about alternatives to
computer replacement, and the significant hardware requirements for upgrading to Windows
11. Many other forms of software obsolescence exist, such as mandatory updates that can
cause malfunctions or overburden device memory, or part-pairing that digitally ties a part to
the device (preventing its replacement or refurbishment), among others.

Switching to free and open-source software: a viable alternative to promote

Transitioning to free and open-source software like Linux allows users to:

    ●​ Free themselves from the unilateral decisions of Microsoft and other non-European
       software publishers,
    ●​ Significantly extend the lifespan of their devices,
    ●​ Do so securely and without license purchase costs.

However, installation requires technical skills that are not yet widely accessible, and may
involve adapting certain uses. This challenge has already been identified in the
recommendations of French public authorities. GNU/Linux already equips the vast majority
of the Gendarmerie nationale's devices. As already highlighted in a 2012 circular from the
French Prime Minister, free and open-source software “is driven by actual needs,
minimizing unnecessary changes.” It is high time these recommendations were put into
practice.

These points were echoed in a collective opinion column calling on French public
administrations and individuals to seriously consider switching to free and open-source
operating systems.

2
HOP's propositions against software obsolescence and to support the
development of open-source softwares

    1.​ To impose the free availability of security updates for at least 15 years after the
       latest unit released on the market.

Making software components available is essential to allow users to freely use the products
they have purchased and to extend their lifespan. This means ensuring their availability for
15 years after the equipment is no longer marketed.

    2.​ Extending the lifespan of devices after the end of software support

Software publishers should be required, at the end of free support, to:

    ●​ Guarantee access to extended support at a reasonable cost, without loss of
       functionality, with duration and price announced at the time of software purchase,
    ●​ Inform users about switching to a free and open-source operating system,
    ●​ Open-source the software, enabling users to continue using their devices. Open
       source is an opportunity to extend product lifespans.

    3.​ Restoring user control over their computer equipment at the time of purchase

The Windows operating system is widely preinstalled on PCs at the time of purchase, and
the cost of its license is included in the price of the computer, often without the buyer’s
awareness. HOP supports consumer choice from the moment of purchase, including:

    ●​ The option to buy a computer without a preinstalled operating system,
    ●​ Clear display of the cost of proprietary software licenses (such as Windows) at the
       time of purchase,
    ●​ Clear display of information regarding software lifespan and the device’s ability to
       receive new versions at the time of purchase.

3
    4.​ Curbing the risk of software obsolescence in public services

For example, some parking payment apps accepted by the city of Paris are not compatible
with operating systems older than iOS 16, excluding some residents. Applications and
websites providing public services (post office, banking, libraries, museums, etc.) should
function on all user devices. When this is impossible, the public body should provide an
alternative service accessible to all. Additionally, it would be wise to promote the eco-design
of software by reducing the computing power required for their operation.

    5.​ Raising awareness among public administrations and the general public about
       responsible digital practices and free software

Transitioning to free and open-source software can represent a significant burden for public
administrations in terms of training time and adapting practices. It is important to create
spaces for exchange between administrations on this topic and to raise awareness among
European officials and civil servants about free software as a first step in the transition.

To prioritize the use of free software, European administrations and member states could
include in their software-related tenders a systematic requirement to evaluate open-source
solutions, following the “Open Source First” principle.

To raise public awareness of these issues, programs on responsible digital practices should
be implemented across all relevant professional sectors and in schools to better design,
maintain, and use digital services. A concrete proposal would be to scale up the NIRD
initiative, launched in France by a collective of teachers to promote the use of GNU/Linux
distributions adapted for education in schools.

    6.​ Mandating the reversibility of software updates

Operating system updates can cause malfunctions, pushing consumers toward new
purchases. For example, a software update was imposed on Google Pixel 4A smartphones
in January 2025, with detrimental effects on battery life, and no option to revert or access
facilitated repair services for all consumers regardless of their country of residence. It is
necessary to ensure the reversibility of software updates to avoid negative impacts on
product lifespan.

4