Ref. Ares(2026)1224972 - 03/02/2026
                                                                       2026-02-03

        The Apache Software Foundation welcomes the opportunity to
        present evidence for the strategic approach to open-source that
        the European Commission is developing.

The Apache Software Foundation is one of the oldest and largest global
open source organisations in the world; home to projects such as the
Apache HTTP Server, Tomcat, Air ow, Kafka and many others. Software
that is often foundational for the internet, e-commerce, big data and,
more recently, Arti cial Intelligence. It is an all-volunteer, member-based
organisation with well over a thousand volunteer members from all
over the globe that oversee over ten thousand volunteer committers and
many more volunteer contributors to maintain well over three hundred
open source software products. It exists to provide software for the
`public good'.

As our peer open source foundations have already stressed the good
that supporting efforts, such as the European Sovereign Tech Fund (EU-
STF), can bring - we'd like to focus more narrowly on four areas: 1) A
Global Community, 2) Encouraging Participation, 3) the importance
Friction Free Participation and 4) ensuring there is the Capacity to
Participate.

1) Open Source only works if it is rooted in a Global Community

First - we want to stress the global community aspect. As stressed again
and again in studies - open source, and the growth it has made possible,
such as Interoperability and by extension the internet and e-commerce,
are one of the largest engineering constructs ever build. And in this
context - it is often said that the smartest people work for `someone else'.
This is why, at the Apache Software Foundation, our core principle is
that of `Community over Code'. A large, healthy and diverse community,
long term, is more important than the actual code created and
maintained today. As it is the skills and capacity of the former that
makes the latter, writing and maintaining code over long periods of
time, possible.

                                                                                 1/4
          fi
                          fl
                                                                   2026-02-03
We therefore urge the Commission to consider the global aspect of open
source - and to understand that an improvement to a shared piece of
code in Europe, in South America, in the US or in China bene ts us all.
And that broad cooperation and long term access to people and shared
community knowledge is more important than narrow control over
some private `fork' of the code.

2) Open Source is overly sensitive to Participation Hurdles

Secondly - by and large the reason why open source has `won'; why it
has become the primary engine of innovation and the 8.8 trillion dollar
valued foundation of the software industry is that its core is a
amplifying feedback loop driven by enlightened self interest. Or, as it is
known in open source - the drive 'to scratch your own itch'. By
contributing to the pool of open source, you as a developer, as a
company, or as a public sector agency, virtually always gain more in the
mid- and long-term than the cost of your contribution. The long-term
business case is massively positive. For the contributor; and indirectly,
for society.

However, in Europe (somewhat unlike the rest of the world), most
targeted instruments, tax bene ts and other programmes at EU and
member state level disincentivise this very feedback loop. Rather than
entice, or reward, organisations for strengthening the infrastructure,
improve security or x bugs that matter the most for them-- they
generally do the opposite. With instruments and bene ts only effective
for the proprietary private elements build (the 1%) rather than the open
source (99%) who together makes the companies product. And
penalising the latter. And thus directing attention away from things such
as maintenance, security and xing bugs that bene t both the
contributor and society as a whole. Or in other words - such hurdles
breaks that fragile `enlightened self interest' that is at the hearth of the
success.

So it is key that this EU strategy changes that situation in the EU - and
shapes its instruments as to encourages industry and academia to
contribute -- rather than be another measure that hampers and tempers.

                                                                         2/4
            fi
                     fi
                          fi
                                           fi
                                                fi
                                                      fi
                                                                    2026-02-03
3) Open Source & Standards only work if access is Friction Free

Thirdly - we stress the importance of access to Open Standards. Open
Source, the Internet and the World Wide Web have two things in
common. First, they became the dominant way of doing things in
society - as the inherently drove an economic network effect. Also using
the same open standard, open source or connecting to the same internet
and World Wide Web meant interoperability and access with the largest
pool. And secondly, they granted, during their evolution, very easy,
permission-less, `gratis' and open access to those that wanted to become
part of it.

With each new participant required to just invest in what they wanted to
do themselves; and without having to pay a toll, ask permission or
negotiate for access.

Getting access to open source is as easy as downloading and compiling
the code. Becoming part of the internet is as easy as connecting to the
nearest bit of internet to you. Getting access to its standards (e.g. at the
IETF and W3C) is as easy as going to a URL. Setting up a website is as
easy as running one. No permission, no complex payment, government
permits or toll-gates whatsoever.

With the increasing regulation of the software industry - it is crucial that
any and all standards required to comply with regulation are available
to all; gratis and easily. In formats that are conductive to implementation
and innovation.

Anything else will break the aforementioned feedback loop that gave us
the internet, or - at best, will sti e innovation.

So it is key that the EUs strategy allows for participation to be as
friction-free as possible. Ensuring that any and all standards are
available as a free, anonymous, download from anywhere on the globe
is an essential rst step.

                                                                          3/4
      fi
                       fl
                                                                              2026-02-03
4) Creating Open Source Capacity and Capability is crucial

Finally - Capacity and Capability Building. Virtually any product or
service with Digital Elements, or Software, is built on, or consists of
mostly of open source. With a thin (but crucial, highly speci c and very
valuable) layer of proprietary code `on top' that is the actual thing people
feel they pay for. But the bottom 90% (and usually much more) is open
source. And that 90% requires a broad range of people and skills in
industry and the public sector that necessarily need to understand this
and maintain it. Yet very few polytechnic, college or university students
in any STEM eld in Europe are exposed to open source software
creation or maintenance. Or are taught how to be a productive member
of the open source communities during their studies. Commonly the
focus is on just that thin layer `on top'. So we call upon the EU to also
promote long-term capacity-- and capability--building in Europe as a
key element of the strategy.

And this is made more important as modern IT is not just in need of
STEM engineers; but it is also requiring a deep understanding of open
source by, for example, auditors, security, forensic, policy makers (as law
is often implemented in code), legal- and cyber-experts. The strategy
therefore needs to see to creating, and then ensuring Europe’s continued
access, to additional capacity and capability. And we suggest
considering doing so during that in ection point in which young
professionals start to specialise. This can be done with a mixture of
courses, grants and incentives, during their studies, that helps students
to become part of the open source community early; giving them the key
skills and habits to work within this community. Hands-on and in
practice.

And with that prepare a new generation, and society for our digital
future. The global open source community, our community, will
welcome them with open arms.

                                         The Apache Software Foundation
                                             1000 N West Street, Suite 1200
                                                    Wilmington, DE 19801
                                                  United States of America

                                                  EU-TR: 460992853150-94

                                                                                    4/4
     fi
                            fl
                                                         fi