Ref. Ares(2026)1222036 - 03/02/2026

                                             CALL FOR EVIDENCE
                                  European Open Digital Ecosystems
                                       Specific-Group Healthcare GmbH

1.    What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector? What
      are the main barriers that hamper (i) adoption and maintenance of high-
      quality and secure open source; and (ii) sustainable contributions to open-
      source communities?

       There are already many globally known open-source projects. Some are de-
       facto standard software or sector leaders. The EU has the possibility to create a
       strong open-source community.

      i.   Following barriers hamper adoption and maintenance of high-quality and
           secure open source:

                a. Dealmaking ability of big companies and active counter work against
                      open source.

                b. User acceptance of new and unknown products.

                c. Lack of administrators know-how in open-source alternatives
                      compared to already known and in use proprietary products.

     ii.   Sustainable contributions to open-source communities are hampered by:

                a. Mindset of companies – both on customer and provider side, that
                      open-source means “for free”.

                b. Missing incentives to contribute “Why should we contribute when
                      others profit from it as well”.

 Specific-Group Healthcare GmbH
 Hoher Markt 5 / DG I 1010 Vienna, Austria
 www.specific-group.at                                                         Page 1
2.    What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors?
      Please provide concrete examples, including the factors (such as cost, risk,
      lock-in, security, innovation, among others) that are most important to
      assess the added value.

Another very important topic, which is tied to open source, is open standards. The
healthcare sector has proven for decades that open standards improve overall
care and management of patients. Organizations like HL7, IHE, DICOM continuously
develop and improve many different standards for healthcare. For example, the
HAPI project provides open-source projects based on these standards.

Open protocol and data standards and more open-source technologies are more
important than ever for projects like the European Health Data Space (EHDS), which
aims to benefit all EU citizens. Especially defined components such as libraries,
development frameworks, runtimes like HAPI FHIR, Angular, Java, Docker, etc. which
are not covered by medical device regulation (MDR) or their benefit outweighs risks
and can be managed as software of unknown provenance (SOUP), usually benefit
the common good e.g. usually faster security and bug fixes or common
vulnerabilities and exposures (CVE) detection, faster and cheaper development
cycles which can make good products affordable. Furthermore, healthcare
facilities have many software systems like any other company e.g. office software,
operating systems (OS), enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems, where open-
source software like NextCloud, Linux, Odoo, if managed properly, can prevent
vendor lock-in and allows clinics reduce license costs and use the resources for
medical material which are only physically available.

The public healthcare sector would have the benefit that knowledge and expertise
is gradually built up with every project on a national and international level.
Solutions for common problems can be spread easier. Costs can be lowered or
reinvested in the open standard and source ecosystem. If the public health sector
uses open-source, the focus of many developers will be concentrated, which will
lead to improvements.

Specific-Group Healthcare GmbH
Hoher Markt 5 / DG I 1010 Vienna, Austria
www.specific-group.at                                                    Page 2
3.    What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support the
      development and growth of the EU open-source sector and contribute to the
      EU’s technological sovereignty and cybersecurity agenda?

Incentives for open-source projects. Individuals, organizations and companies
should get incentives for contributing work to open-source projects. Many projects,
that are basically fundamental for monetized services or products, be it open or
closed sourced, are maintained by single persons. The EU should support those
projects, by supporting the maintainers directly with funds to avoid knowledge silos
and single-point-of-failures, create a program to encourage shared maintenance
or offer maintenance responsibility through a EU institution. Providers of services or
products, that are using open-source projects, should have an incentive to give
back to the community. Either by providing work to the projects (development,
testing, QA, project management, ...) or by funding them.

4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why?

The public sector and critical infrastructure. The EU needs to be self-sufficient and
resilient against direct or indirect attacks on the public sector and its critical
infrastructure.

A concrete example would be strengthening the software supply chain by
supporting European source code repositories and mirrors, package registries and
security programs.

Our expertise lies within healthcare IT, which counts as critical infrastructure. The
healthcare sector is already proving that open standards, are inevitable, and open-
source is a reliable alternative. If the EU provides incentives for open-source
contribution, license fees, for closed source services or products, can be cut down
and used for cost savings and reinvesting in open-source projects. This would lead
to, in the case of the healthcare sector, benefits and improved quality for patients
in the EU and worldwide.

Specific-Group Healthcare GmbH
Hoher Markt 5 / DG I 1010 Vienna, Austria
www.specific-group.at                                                      Page 3
5.    In what sectors could an increased use of open-source lead to increased
      competitiveness and cyber resilience?

As mentioned before, the public sector and critical infrastructure would benefit in
cyber resilience.

The cost focus would shift from license fees to provided services. The
competitiveness would shift from products and already available features to
knowledge in the sector and the ability for successful implementations and the
ability to improve open-source projects with new features or customizations.

Specific-Group Healthcare GmbH
Hoher Markt 5 / DG I 1010 Vienna, Austria
www.specific-group.at                                                    Page 4