Ref. Ares(2026)1168182 - 02/02/2026

Comment “Towards European open digital ecosystems”

submitted by UwU-Space on behalf of

Marcel Schneider ceemos@cascode.eu
Anja Pfund anja.pfund@protonmail.ch
maya “551724” boeckh maya@catgirl.global
Matteo Rizzi mr@0x4141.eu
Tim Tina Strutzberg tim.tina@strutzberg.net
Xanthea Andromeda Elenora B. G. ep+elenora@estrogen.zone
Lukas Huber lukas.huber@roamingstone.ch
and 1 more anonymous member

2026-02-02

As a group of individuals that are both privately and professionally involved in commercial
and open source software projects in Europe, we are directly affected by EU activities and
regulation around open source software. As an organization, we are working towards public
accessibility of knowledge, where open source software, hardware and science plays a main
role.

We believe that to support the open source community as well as the European industry, the
EU needs to clarify and improve the legal and regulatory framework that we work in, beyond
basic financial support of open source projects:

   1. (access) Broad, public access to computing hardware, including all hardware features,
        must be encouraged, legally protected and if necessary enforced by commercial regu-
        lation.
   2. (compliance) Commercial, governmental and private entities must be able to use open
        source software without unnecessary regulatory risk and complications.
   3. (circumvention) It must be possible for open-source as well as commercial projects
        to bypass artificial restrictions set by hardware and software vendors.

The software ecosystem. To understand these requests, it is crucial to consider how the
European software ecosystem differs from those in other parts of the world. We can broadly
distinguish two different types of commercial activities and how they interact with software:

                                             Page 1
    • (type 1) “real world” businesses that focus on providing physical products and ser-
         vices to consumers, and extract profits from selling those products and services. Soft-
         ware is often a crucial part of the product (embedded into pyhsical products, as in-
         frastructure behind services), and is required to effectively provide the products and
         services (ERP and office software, CAD tools), but is never itself the product. Exam-
         ples include BMW, Bosch, Mikrotik, Prusa, Teltonika, and millions of small and medium
         companies.
    • (type 2) “gatekeeping” businesses that focus on providing software and infrastruc-
         ture to individuals and other businesses, that extract profits by restricting and selling
         access to this software. The software and services provided are often not really useful
         on their own, but required to operate real-world businesses, and access to software is
         the product. Examples include Apple, Autodesk, Google, IBM, Microsoft, Oracle, SAP.

In public perception, the “software industry” is typically only the type-2 companies, which
predominantly exist in the Silicon Valley and shape how we interact with computers and
software. This is not surprising, as that is their purpose and their goal.

This however obscures the fact that, especially in Europe, there is a much larger group of
type-1 businesses that use and produce large amounts of software, often freely shared in
open source collaborations. They suffer from the business practices of the type-2 companies
trying to extract profits from the software that they depend on.

Therefore, the European open source strategy must not fall for the common trap of demand-
ing more Silicon Valley style type-2 companies that extract profits at the cost of the type-1
companies that form the backbone of the European economy; instead, it must provide the
open source community and type-1 companies with the tools and legal backing to push back
at the type-2 companies “eating the world”1 .

Examples (type-1). Most classic industry products today ship with some embedded software
components, and the product independent parts of this software are usually widely shared
open source components such as ffmpeg, Linux or Qt. Open platforms developed in an aca-
demic context such as PX4 grow to become cornerstones of entire high-tech ecosystems, in
this case the drone industry. Internal tooling such as KiCad or NextCloud are improved as
needed and passed on, generally without involvement of the corporate structures at all.

Examples (type-2). Microsoft is the classic example of a company that has entrenched it-
   1
       https://a16z.com/why-software-is-eating-the-world/

                                                      Page 2
self in a way that it is impossible to do business without paying them some fees; despite
the products (operating systems, office software, document management solutions) being
well understood and with plenty of commercial and open-source alternatives. Ironically, Mi-
crosoft owes its existence2 to a fear of antitrust regulation, that is now no longer present
and allows the company to hold a dominating position. Apple is in some ways a competitor,
but has instead entrenched itself with staggering vertical integration, controlling all layers of
computer economy from chip manufacturing (via deals with TSMC3 ) to application software.
Reports on Apple designing cars4 show how far this vertical integration could go. Due to this
integration, it is hard for smaller players to compete, unless they can get access to some of
the layers thaks to regulation.

Providing access. Open source software development, and software development in gen-
eral, is only possible with access to the platforms that can execute the software. While some
of those are now more accessible than ever (e.g. the web platform or Minecraft as an educa-
tional platform), we are worried that more and more layers in the computation stack become
locked down and inaccessible to hobbyists and smaller industry players. The main drivers are
intellectual property protection (e.g. Widevine5 ) and cyber security requirements requiring
trusted boot chains, as well as vertically integrated players restricting access to themselves.

While so far we retain the ability to run our own software (e.g. through custom secure
boot keys on EFI platform, bootloader unlock on Android devices, or the undocumented
support for third-party operating systems on the Apple Mac platform), these paths are all
at the discretion of the hardware vendors and are increasingly disappearing: Secure boot
usually can’t be bypassed on ARM-based PCs, the iOS platform offers no option for third
party operating systems or sideloading and Google Pixel is the last high-end mobile platform
with full open source support6 .

The regulation has made progress towards ensuring this access through regulation, but we
are far from a satisfying situation. While we can generally still access and target application
processors, the situation is less clear for recent generations of compute accelerators such
as GPUs, AI coprocessors, or camera image processors. Other components such as radio
modems were never accessible. There is some irony in how cybersecurity requirements such

   2
       https://pluralistic.net/2022/10/02/the-true-genius-of-tech-leaders/
   3
       https://www.phonearena.com/news/tsmc-reserves-80-percent-of-its-2021-5nm-production-for-apple_id129196
   4
       https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apple_car_project
   5
       https://widevine.com/
   6
       https://grapheneos.org/faq#future-devices

                                                         Page 3
as for trusted boot are used as an excuse to make software platforms inaccesible to research
and independent software develoment, leading to less secure systems overall7 .

We urge the European Union to demand public access to all layers of computation,
to foster innovation, promote digital independence and make our digital lives more secure.

Examples. The Raspberry Pi foundation has the goal to enable access to computation hard-
ware for education. Despite their position as a major player in developer mindshare and
embedded hardware, they are heavily restricted in what layers of their hardware they can
provide access to, due to their dependence on silicon vendors and and contractual obliga-
tions towards them. The RISC-V ecosystem provides open hardware access to the lowest
levels of computation, but ultimatly software developers are still dependent on silicon ven-
dors to provide access to the cryptographically protected boot chain. Building own vertically
integrated projects with the explicit goal of providing all this access is a band-aid solution,
as such hardware will not be competitive with the massive scale of foreign consumer hard-
ware flooding the European market. Pine64 is a Chinese vendor that provides state-of-the art
consumer hardware with open source support as a core feature, but coming from a Chinese
background, there are massive cultural and legal barriers to rely on such hardware commer-
cially. Schenker Technologies is a German hardware vendor that provides PC hardware with
explicit open source support (under the Tuxedo brand), but is limited to what the silicon ven-
dors allow and software monopolists such as Microsoft demand. The same goes for System76,
an open-source friendly vendor based in the US.

Compliance. European companies are subject to a large amount of regulation, laws and
standards; and compliance with those is a core part of operating enterprise IT. Here, we
observe the issue that compliance generally favours big players, which have the capacity
and expertise to read and interpret the applicable regulation themselves, and also carry the
legal risk of their decisions, potentially defending them in court. Smaller market participants
will generally license an off-the-shelf solution that offers out-of-the-box compliance with all
applicable and even non-applicable regulation, as it is often not clear what regulation even
applies.

This perceived legal ambiguity hinders adoption of open source solutions. Even if open
source solutions are fully compliant (or even more compliant) with regulation such as the
GDPR or standards like ISO27000, and in also domains where regulation is less strict, the

   7
       https://www.crossing.tu-darmstadt.de/news_events/crossing_details_294784.en.jsp

                                                       Page 4
users carry more legal risk without a trusted, large entity guaranteeing compliance. Com-
bined with the more risk-averse nature of European type-1 companies, this entrenches the
dominance of international type-2 giants that promise legal security.

We’d like to see the EU support flagship projects that demonstrate that compliance
with European regulation can be easy and clear, and does not depend on international
partners for legal support. We remind the European regulators to be always aware of the
risk of regulatory capture when phrasing new regulation, and to be clear and unambiguous
to keep regulation accessible to entities without dedicated legal teams.

Examples. This effect is colloquially described as “nobody ever got fired for buying IBM”. Even
when the involved individuals are aware that their decision to go with a big vendor will be
expensive and technically inferior, they avoid personal responsibility by doing so. The dom-
inant solutions today are based on Microsoft products, with Microsoft Europe providing the
legal support for every imaginable compliance regime. Ironically, cyber security standards
like ISO27000 help proliferate this monoculture of corporate IT solutions, often improperly
set up and thereby massive cybersecurity hazards. Technically competent individuals tend
to avoid this space, since creative ideas generally cannot be realized due to compliance con-
cerns. Some domestic companies like SAP also exploit the risk aversity of other European
enterprises. Recent regulation, such as the GDPR and the CRA requirements, are better at
being effective regulation and allowing for creative solutions, but changing the perception
and reputation of European regulation as a whole is a longer term effort.

Circumvention and adversarial interoperability. The main challenges for open-source
software today are legal and contractual, not technical, as pointed out above. In this environ-
ment, facing big industry players that seek to entrench their position in the market, smaller
players and open-source projects are left with only one option to keep innovating and ad-
vancing the state of the art: By technically circumventing the artificial barriers that prevent
platform and market access, not in cooperation, but adversarially. Such an approach is al-
ways risky, as the vendors can break adversarial integrations intentionally or accidentally
at any moment, but it is even more so legally risky as there is a wide range of regulation,
often imposed by international treaties, that bans any form of circumvention, adversarial
integration, or reverse engineering (“anti circumvention laws”). Additionally, any adversar-
ial interoperability generally also involves a risk of violation of classic intellectual property
protections such as trademarks.

                                             Page 5
Open source projects and many companies are deeply familiar with this situation. European
law provides a wide range of protections for reverse engineering and interoperability, as
well as the absence of software patents, but things become less clear once products leave
the European market. In contrast, the Chinese electronics ecosystem freely shares restricted
documentation and source code, and such code that was likely developed in violation of the
restrictions set by western vendors, ends up on the European market. The cultural and legal
differences protect the Chinesese manufacturers sufficiently, while European projects can’t
benefit from the information available there.

We urge the European Union to repeal any anti-circumvention laws that have be-
come effective in the last decades, and instead to strengthen the protections of adversar-
ial interoperability to make projects that rely on reverse engineering and circumvention also
commercially viable.

Examples. Some well-known European open source projects, such as VLC media player and
ffmpeg could only grow under the absence of software patents, which otherwise hindered in-
novation in the digital video space. Avoiding proprietary standards sometimes takes comical
dimensions, such as u-blox referring to a “display data channel” interface8 rather than using
the industry standard term “I2C” (“I2C” is trademarked, while “display data channel” is the
same interface specified as part of the open DisplayPort specification). Reverse engineering
is extremely common in the industry, and often results in tiny open source projects such as
pystlink9 , that while barely worth mentioning, help to make European manufacturing more
efficient. Reverse engineered graphics drivers that touch on various kinds of restricted in-
tellectual property are developed in Europe as open source projects, driven by pragmatic
needs for long-term support and reliability, for example etnaviv, funded by an aerospace
company10 .

    8
        https://content.u-blox.com/sites/default/files/SAM-M8Q_HardwareIntegrationManual_%28UBX-16018358%29.pdf
    9
        https://github.com/pavelrevak/pystlink
   10
        https://www.collabora.com/news-and-blog/blog/2017/06/05/android-nxp-imx6-buffer-modifier-support/

                                                        Page 6