Ref. Ares(2026)343440 - 14/01/2026

                        Continuity Funding
                For research that is not a competitive project

                                        Executive Summary
This brief proposal advocates for a new form of European and national research funding,
called Continuity Funding. It departs from the problem statement that current research
funding, which is organised around competitive research and innovation projects, is too
dominant and is thereby causing detrimental impacts for the entire research ecosystem,
including (1) the precarity of academic labour, (2) the unsustainability of research results,
and (3) the large overhead and administrative burden for obtaining research funding.
Continuity Funding is designed to address each of these problems, as it rests on three
distinct principles. First, it aims at generating a continuous stream of funding for a research
network and for the individuals in this network who can benefit until they reach a permanent
position. Second, it aims at continuity of the research done in a network, giving as much of
space and time necessary for research results to mature without the need to competitively
apply for new rounds of research funding (although periodic reviews are still taking place).
Third, it requires significantly less overhead as most of the renewal will happen naturally,
through individuals joining research networks instead of each network constantly having to
apply for funding with new research proposals and new rounds of proposal reviews.
Continuity funding will also have to come with a set of individual and institutional incentives,
which will ensure that it reaches its aims.

   1.​Problem statement: the detrimental effects of
      current research funding
To start, let us define the problem, which is multifaceted. The focus will be on the European
research funding ecosystem, organised under the umbrella of Horizon Europe, but since
most national research funding systems in Europe mimic this structure, the problem
statement largely applies to those national systems as well. Horizon Europe is organised
according to three Pillars: Pillar I for fundamental research, Pillar II for consortium-based
research and innovation projects, and Pillar III for innovation projects. As Pillar I and II
include a focus on academic research, both of these will be included in the problem
statement.

What should be emphasised is that Pillar I and II have one important thing in common: they
both focus on competitive research projects, which means that research funding is allocated
on the basis of project-based proposals for research projects with a limited time span (2-5
years). These projects are included in continuously renewed rounds of competition,
organised around research funding calls. This setup creates three distinct problems that are
shared between Pillar I and II projects:
   (1)​ Project-based research funded through competitions raises a significant amount of
        overhead, which to a large extent is invisible and unaccounted for. This includes,
        amongst others, (1) the time spent by researchers and innovators on proposal
        writing, which would otherwise be spent on research, teaching, and innovating (2) the
        time and resources spent on reviewing proposals, and (3) the significant public and
        commercial ecosystem surrounding research funding, with agencies helping with
        proposal preparation, training, etc. This is not all bad, but at present the time and
        resources spent on this is disproportional in relation to the gains made by facilitating
        competitive research. It is not controversial to claim that multiple research-intensive
        universities could be founded in Europe if the resources currently spent on overhead
        for research grant competitions would be allocated to those.
   (2)​ Competitive research funding generates considerable institutional and regional
        inequalities. Generally, rich and well-performing institutions and countries have a
        considerable advantage when it comes to having successful research funding grants
        compared to their less well-performing peers in poorer countries. Although there is an
        additional focus on widening countries in Horizon Europe, this does not offset this
        inequality and additionally incentivises ‘country shopping’ (e.g., onboarding an
        institution from a widening country purely to have a more competitive proposal).
   (3)​ Project-based research might incentivise novelty, but it also puts the organisation
        of research increasingly in a straight jacket. The contention is that a significant
        portion of research does not benefit from a project-structure. Projects with a clear
        ending invariably make sustainability problematic (see comment below on Pillar II
        research), as funding on a particular theme dries up and follow-up funding relies on
        continued granting of funds. Moreover, projects assume that research and its
        dynamics can always be more or less anticipated. This may also be problematic, as
        some research may shift dramatically (e.g., away from the ‘promises’ in work
        packages) and novelty may not always be anticipated but, alternatively, ‘encountered’
        in the course of a continuous research stream.

Apart these commonalities, Pillar I and II also suffer from distinct problems for the research
ecosystem as a whole:

Pillar I projects are very good for individual researchers who win them, oftentimes
guaranteeing future career success, but this does not automatically translate into an overall
benefit for the research ecosystem as a whole. These are the distinct problems:
    (1)​ Pillar I research funding is a ‘winner takes all’ system, in which very few
         researchers are rewarded with relatively large grants (and recognition), giving them a
         headstart vis-à-vis their peers. This is certainly good for the stimulation of exceptional
         excellence in research, but also makes Pillar I research funding inaccessible to the
         majority of people working in the research ecosystem, thereby contributing little to the
         majority of research careers. Yet, next to obtaining a scarce faculty position,
         obtaining a high-end research grant is seen as the only viable way for researchers to
         secure non-precarious employment.
    (2)​ Pillar I research funding generally rewards research mobility. Marie Curie funding
         calls have made mobility a requirement, while ERC research projects generate
         oftentimes precarious positions (e.g., 2 or 3 year postdocs) that incentivise people to
         move towns or countries. This is not a problem for a part of the population with
         research careers, especially those without a spouse or children. However, for those
         with a committed home base because of spouse and/or children, these mobility
         possibilities or requirements are much less attractive. This makes that Pillar I
         research over-stimulates mobile, precarious research careers while
       under-stimulating careers that make a long-term contribution to the local research
       ecosystem. Certainly, this is less the case for national funding schemes, but as these
       are increasingly accessible to researchers from around the globe, a similar
       mobility-first effect occurs.

Nevertheless, Pillar I research provides a real benefit to the research ecosystem as it
incentivises and rewards excellent research and mobility, forging a high performing
international research community. The point is that these effects are, at current, too
dominant and are thereby causing negative externalities for the large swaths of the
population of researchers and innovators who do not benefit from these aspects.

Pillar II projects have significant beneficial impacts insofar as they incentivise international
and transdisciplinary collaboration on projects that connect research with societal impacts.
Yet, a significant share of these benefits is offset by negative externalities, the most
important of which are:
    (1)​ Due to the discontinuous nature of projects, research and innovation under Pillar II
         often fails to be sustainable. The burst of funding on a project generates great
         activity, focusing on a particular theme or topic, but once the funding dries up the
         project as a whole also dries up - unless a new source or new round of funding is
         secured. Project results often end up on non-maintained project websites, where
         lengthy deliverables (i.e., reports) can be accessed that very few people consult after
         the project ends, as funding for dissemination also dries up. Moreover, many
         outcomes in the form of initiatives for standardization, moving from prototype to
         market, etc., are abandoned after a project concludes. This is, frankly, a wasteful use
         of money spent on research and innovation.
    (2)​ Due to the short-lived nature of Pillar II projects, these projects tend to generate a
         significant amount of precarious labour, based on short-term contracts with no
         tangible prospects for future career development. Pillar II projects often employ
         research assistants with part-time contracts, and 2- or 3-year postdocs that have no
         chance of being renewed or being turned into fixed positions. This generates a dual
         negative impact: for the researcher, whose career depends on a precarious position
         that restricts significant life choices (e.g., settling down, having children); and for the
         institution, which invests in a potentially great employee without being able to
         cultivate a lasting connection with this employee.

Taken together, the organisation of funding in Pillars I and II generates significant negative
externalities to the research and innovation ecosystem as a whole, including (1) a
proliferation of precarious and casual labour, which is an internationally acknowledged
problem,1 (2) the lacking sustainability of research and innovation results, which generates
barriers for progress in science and an inadequate, frantic impulse to the innovation
ecosystem, and (3) the large and unaccounted for overhead costs that go into acquiring
project-based competitive funding, leading to a misallocation of resources. Furthermore,
despite the positive impacts of the current organisation of research funding, in that it rewards
excellent, mobile, and internationally organised science and innovation, these positive

1
 See e.g.,
https://www.oecd.org/content/dam/oecd/en/publications/reports/2024/02/the-state-of-academic-career
s-in-oecd-countries_dc11b29d/ea9d3108-en.pdf
effects cause a lopsided system. This lopsidedness creates regional and institutional
inequalities, makes research funding inaccessible to big parts of the research and innovation
communities, and puts research in a project-based straight jacket that oftentimes may not be
the most suitable format for research organisation.

   2.​The solution: Continuity Funding
As a solution to the abovementioned problems, this document proposes a completely new
research and innovation funding format: Continuity Funding. This new form of funding is
targeting a specific cohort in the research and innovation ecosystem: young career scholars
and innovators (the German ‘Mittelbau’), which in many member states comprises the
largest portion of the research and innovation community that is also mostly experiencing the
negative externalities. Roughly speaking, this group may be defined as having finished their
highest degree (e.g., PhD) but not yet having acquired employment with an unlimited
contract (e.g., a professorship). This cohort is most reliant on third-party research funding,
which may be crucial for ensuring future career potential, and also finds itself in a life phase
of important decisions (e.g., having a spouse, getting children, settling down).

In a nutshell, continuity funding is based on a one-time proposal for a research (and
innovation) network of a definite group of scholars and innovators, from different countries
and different institutions, much like a consortium in Pillar II research. This proposal combines
aspects of Pillar I and Pillar II requirements: it contains a common section, much like the
‘Excellence’ section in Pillar II proposals, that provides for a common umbrella and rationale
for establishing a thematic research and innovation network, which also outlines the impacts
of the work beyond academia. Apart from this, the proposal contains individual entries of
each of the participating scholars, which resemble short-form versions of the B1 proposal of
ERC applications. The idea is that the proposal simultaneously communicates the thematic
coherence and viability of the research network as a whole, and the capability and solid
career perspectives of each of the applicants, as well as the innovative nature of their
individual research agendas. Furthermore, the participating institutions will, for each
individual applicant, have to supply a career development plan, outlining a credible pathway
towards an unlimited contract at the institution. Criteria for individual participation can be
broader than just being about research excellence, as e.g., excellence in teaching may also
be a great benefit for a network.

As these are one-time proposals, they have to be subjected to rigorous peer-review,
assessing the network as a whole and the quality of each applicant. Once a network is
granted funding, the funding amount is established based on a yearly grant contribution that
will be inflation adjusted (e.g., 1 million euro per year). From this money, individual salaries
and purchasing costs will be funded, apart from an incentive based contribution (see below).
Additional costs, like one-time expensive equipment, will need to be applied for separately
and will not be subjected to yearly renewal.

Once a proposal is granted, funding for the network as a whole in principle never expires.
However, funding for individual participants does expire, namely, once they enter into
unlimited employment contracts. This ensures a constant renewal and novelty in the
network, as new positions in the network become available once a member passes on to
unlimited employment (e.g., becoming a professor). Furthermore, networks may ‘naturally’
decline over time, as freed-up positions are no longer actively filled, most members enter
into unlimited employment contracts, or a thematic research area loses its innovative nature
and relevance. The decline of networks generates new space for additional networks to be
created over time. This process of decline and renewal can and probably should be steered
by means of policy. If, for instance, there is a greater need for new, innovative networks,
policies might be directed at speeding up decline of the under-performing networks without
affecting the careers of the individual members who are part of those networks.

There is overhead involved in the granting and maintenance of these research networks.
Most of the overhead is placed at the start, when the research and innovation network enters
into a (probably high stakes) competition. It should be noted, however, that the competitive
element can (and should) be lessened by making calls less ‘open,’ e.g., granting each
research institution the possibility to only apply for one or two networks at a time. Once,
however, a network is established overhead is reduced considerably. There are periodic
(e.g., 2-year) reviews, but these are only ‘check up’ reviews, which should only raise
concerns and follow-up in case of clear underperformance of a network as a whole.
Moreover, once a new member applies to be included in the network a review should be
undertaken, which, however, should not take much more additional resources than a regular
job interview for a faculty position.

Benefits of Continuity Funding
Continuity funding maintains a lot of the benefits of Pillar I and II research and innovation
funding. From Pillar I, it retains the focus on individual excellence, though being much more
accessible than current Pillar I funding (as many more positions can be funded, with lower
funding amounts for individual researchers). From Pillar II, it retains the incentive to generate
international and interdisciplinary networks of researchers and innovators. It does, however,
pose some drawbacks, which should be acknowledged. It does not fund the high-end
excellent science currently funded under Pillar I and it does not fund research and innovation
that is best captured in project form. For these reasons, Continuity funding should be
considered as an important addition (and corrective), rather than replacement, of current
Pillar I and II funding. In fact, as an addition it will likely have positive impacts on the other
funding streams, as e.g., the huge pressure due to a surge in proposals under Pillar I will be
lessened as many scholars will apply to Continuity funding instead.

Furthermore, Continuity funding has a number of specific benefits that directly address the
three negative externalities of current research and innovation funding as listed above.

First, it reduces precarious labour in the research and innovation ecosystem significantly.
As funding is continuous, participants enjoy guaranteed employment, which is extended until
they attain an unlimited employment contract. Underperformance can still be a reason for
firing a person, but this is not different from any other employment situation and should be
initiated by the employing institution, not the funding agency. A big question is, of course,
why institutions would be interested in granting an unlimited employment contract, but this is
outlined below (see ‘Incentive Structure’). As the researcher is embedded for a potentially
unlimited time in an institution, Continuity funding incentivises the cultivation of a long-term
employer-employee relation. Furthermore, this type of funding provides individual members
of a network with the financial security that they need in their respective phase of life, giving
them a basis to settle, start a family, etc.

Second, Continuity funding generates sustainable research results, because funding
never dries up. For instance, as there is no limit to funding of a network, a research line can
be extended as long as necessary for it to come to fruition, be-it 4, 6, or 8 years. Moreover,
innovative outcomes of a project, for instance an open source software infrastructure, can be
maintained as long as needed as there is no pre-given ‘end’ to the innovation activities.
Finally, results can be more actively disseminated, updated, and made accessible to the
larger community, as e.g., the website of a network will be constantly updated, results
constantly communicated with relevant stakeholders, and so on. An added benefit, in terms
of sustainability, is that a research network can become a main and widely known
representative for a particular research theme, so that the wider community doesn’t need to
keep track of thematic projects that constantly come into being and die out but can refer to a
continuing network instead.

Third, Continuity funding significantly reduces the overhead that currently goes into the
acquisition of competitive, project-based research funding. Although overhead is high at the
start, perhaps even higher than for current research funding, this is offset by the significantly
reduced overhead as a network gains in age. It can continue its activities without having to
reapply for funding, without having to write lengthy and potentially unsuccessful proposals,
and without having to spend precious research, teaching, and innovation time on the
acquisition of research and innovation funding. Most of the additional overhead goes to the
individual applications of people who want to join a network, but this is largely the equivalent
of common job applications for faculty positions. At the funding agency, the pressure to find
suitable reviewers is significantly reduced as much less reviews need to be performed. Once
a ‘maximum’ number of networks is active, reviews are only needed for the limited number of
new networks that are to be created because of the decline of existing networks.

As for the lopsidedness of research funding, Continuity funding doesn’t solve all the effects
but has a mitigating effect. It should be noted that there is not necessarily a reduction in
regional and institutional inequality, as rich institutions will have a higher chance of securing
a research network. This will need to be actively addressed by means of policy, e.g., by
limiting the amount of networks an institution can apply for at once and requiring a regional
spread. The other lopsidedness effects, however, are somewhat mitigated, as Continuity
funding offers a pathway for researchers and innovators who seek successful careers at
their local institution rather than high-end excellence and highly mobile careers.
Furthermore, Continuity funding offers new room for the type of research that does not fit the
straight jacket of a proposal, e.g., research that can only be described in terms of a
longer-term ‘agenda’ and not so much in terms of anticipated findings and impacts.

Incentive Structure
A significant challenge for making Continuity funding a success is the incentive structure.
The current research and innovation ecosystem, it should be noted, is not friendly to the
career paths incentivised by Continuity funding. That is, most institutions prefer to offer
short-term, limited contracts and continuously employ new people on a limited contract
basis. Similarly, many researchers and innovators feel compelled to constantly seek out new
options for employment, not forging and cultivating a sustainable bond with their local
institution. Hence, the incentive structure offered by Continuity funding should be such that
institutions are incentivised to offer long-term career perspectives and employees should be
incentivised to cultivate a long-term relation with their institutions.

The biggest challenge is to guarantee the institutional incentive; i.e., to make it attractive for
an institution to join a network that in principle obliges it to guarantee an unlimited
employment contract in the future. To solve for this, funding allocated to the individuals in a
network should have a dual structure. The first part should be the direct funding covering the
salary of an individual member of a network. The second part should be a reservation kept
by the funding agency and invested in a fund, on which the institution employing a member
of the network has a claim. The money in this fund, e.g., 30% of a member’s salary, grows
on a yearly basis and will be accessible to the institution once a member gains an unlimited
employment contract. In this way, a professorship may be partially funded by the reservation
coming out of a network. To incentivise the transition to an unlimited contract, the reservation
is tied to the participating institution for a limited amount of time (e.g., 8 years), after which a
member is able to move it to a new institution, making him or her highly competitive for
gaining a permanent position elsewhere.

The more limited challenge is the cultivation of a longer-term relationship of a member of a
network with an institution. To incentivise this, membership in a network is tied to an
institution, which means that a member cannot change institutions without losing
membership in the network (with the exception of ‘force majeure’ circumstances, e.g.,
institutional harassment).