Ref. Ares(2026)938089 - 27/01/2026

     Call for Evidence: European Open Digital Ecosystems

     1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector? What
     are the main barriers that hamper (i) adoption and maintenance of high-quality
     and secure open source; and (ii) sustainable contributions to open-source
     communities?

     Strengths
        ● The EU has a strong public-sector interest, as well as policy support, to promote
           digital sovereignty, vendor independence and interoperability. The EU Open
           Source Software (OSS) Strategy 2020–2023 already highlights examples of
           institutional support in areas such as cybersecurity (CERT-EU, FOSSA-EU,
           FOSSA 2), licensing (EUPL), programmes (e.g. Next Generation Internet and the
           INSPIRE Directive) and public funding.
        ● The EU also has high-quality research capacity and technical talent, supported
           by strong universities, research laboratories and engineering communities.
        ● EU values and the regulatory framework consistently emphasise trust and
           security, privacy, resilience and compliance. These principles are highly relevant
           and provide a strong foundation for the development of accountable and
           transparent systems.
        ● Awareness of the bene ts of OSS is increasing. The Linux Foundation’s World of
           Open Source Europe Report 2025 shows that 58% of survey respondents
           identi ed innovation as the area that would bene t most from OSS investment.
           This signals that organisations view OSS not only as a way to reduce costs, but
           also as a catalyst for innovation within their business or industry.
        ● Current geopolitical conditions are threatening; however, they are also
           accelerating collective awareness of the need for technological independence
           and sovereignty as it is expressed in the Open Letter: European Industry Calls
           for Strong Commitment to Sovereign Digital Infrastructure of March 14, 2025.
           This creates a timely opportunity to align interests around participatory and
           collective solutions involving all stakeholders, including the private sector, OSS
           communities, the public sector and academia.

     Weaknesses | adoption and maintenance barriers

        ● Despite high-quality R&D in open source systems and a robuts human capital,
          open source systems face dif culties in reaching commercialization and growth
          for several reasons:
              ○ Projects struggle to get continuous sources of funding. Commercial
                 alternatives turn into uneven competition. The market for EU-OSS reduces
fi
              fi
                     fi
                                         fi
              to the public sector. Therefore, projects ow (mainly) to the United
              States.
          ○   The OSS process is broken, projects stall after the research grant/phase
              ends and the projects struggle to access funds to scale, grow, and
              maintenance ends in a sustainability crisis.
          ○   Fragmentation that arises from diverse legal frameworks and regulatory
              differences, fragmented capital markets, and different procurement
              processes where high-tech companies            (including their open source
              software) have more resources and scale, outcompeting local EU OSS.
          ○   The private sector’s engagement with OSS is small. The same study
              from the Linux foundation shows that only 14% of respondents contribute
              to key projects; 28% contribute occasionally; 20% report issues but do not
              contribute, and 23% use OSS but do not contribute back.
          ○   A structural issue in the EU is that projects depend on public funding
              while in the United States, the participation of the private sector is stronger
              and public support is an additional accelerator especially around security.
              In other words, OSS is factored in the competitiveness equation of
              companies. For example, Google, Meta, Amazon, Apple, depending on
              OSS, fund, employ and maintain OSS because it is cheaper for them than
              building everything internally.

                                            ***

2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors?
Please provide concrete examples, including the factors (such as cost, risk, lock-
in, security, innovation, among others) that are most important to assess the
added value.

The Linux Foundation Europe and Linux Foundation Research divisions presented the
study: Open Source as Europe’s Strategic Advantage. The foundation conducted a
survey to 316 organizations and representatives of different industrial sectors during
Q1-2025.

At the industrial level, 58% of industries think that OSS helps in innovation, 54% thinks
that it improves interoperability and standards, around half (49%, 48%) think that OSS
contributes to transparency, reduced operating costs and collaboration.
                                fl
     The second question of interest was: How often does using OSS deliver the following
     bene ts to your organization? The response categories were often, sometimes, rarely,
     and didn't know/didn’t answer.

     The graph shows that a high percentage of organizations perceive that OSS often
     bene ts their organization by increasing productivity, reducing vendor lock-in, lowering
     costs, and providing access to higher-quality software.
fi
fi
     Source: Linux Foundation. Open Source as Europe’s Strategic Advantage. Page 10

                                               ***
     3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support the
     development and growth of the EU open-source sector and contribute to the EU’s
     technological sovereignty and cybersecurity agenda?

        1. The rst recommendation is to adjust the funding policy within Horizon, OSS
           funds, and EU Member States’ innovation policies to support the sustainability
           and growth of OSS projects emerging from EU talent and entrepreneurship.
              a. The revised funding policy should include a fast-track approval process
                  for up to three consecutive, incremental grants for OSS projects that meet
                  their goals and deliver expected results. The second and third applications
                  would be a continuation of funding supporting expanded milestones to
                  help projects grow and scale. At that stage, the agencies managing
                  Horizon and OSS funding have already identi ed promising projects that
                  should be able to grow within the EU.
              b. Secondly, the funding policy should better align incentives between public
                  funders and grantees. This can be achieved through matching grants,
                  where OSS projects receive public funding conditional on commitments to
                  industrial contribution. For example, a project could secure participation
fi
                                     fi
               from companies and industries that use the software and contribute to its
               maintenance, or that provide dedicated staff to work on the software while
               addressing real industrial needs. Such a commitment could mean
               immediate approval of second and third grants from Horizon and other
               OSS EU-funds. Successful projects of this kind will resonate in the private-
               sector and foster their participation. The underlying logic is simple: “If my
               competitor and my neighbour are increasing pro ts and gaining market
               share, I should do the same.”
            c. Third, the Commission should be open in regulatory terms, so that the
               private sector can trigger the potential of blockchain and the token
               economy to propel novel funding mechanisms encompassing DAOs,
               quadratic funding and token design to boost a privately driven and
                 nanced OSS system, regardless of the type of OSS (whether blockchain,
               open AI, edge computing, quantum, etc).

     2. The Commission needs to foster stronger integration between academia,
        industry and OSS communities. One of the key factors behind the USA’s
        leadership in OSS development and growth is the close alignment between
        market commercialisation, universities and OSS projects. OSS laboratories at
        institutions such as Stanford, Berkeley and MIT highlight the importance of
        connecting human capital and R&D with routes to market and clear exit
        strategies. The EU has all the inputs, it is necessary to tie the dots.

     3. Labour market and migration policy: OSS is a matter of human capital. The
        Commission should revamp and recon gure its temporary and permanent
        technical visa policies (as part of migration policy). Again, one of the factors that
        enabled the US to thrive in clusters such as Silicon Valley, Austin and Seattle was
        the availability of H-1B and H-2 visas, aligned with the country’s technical and
        economic priorities.
           ● The EU has a unique opportunity to capitalise on the current shifts in
               US immigration policy, where visas for scienti c and technological
               development are being reduced, entry costs are increasing, employers of
               foreign talent are facing increasing sponsoring fees, and visas are
               increasingly being denied to foreign students. Human capital is eeing to
               other geographies.
           ● Attracting and retaining talent is paramount for a sustainable and
               thriving OSS in the territory, even though ‘the digital world’ does not
               recognise borders and is not built to be attached to a geography, the
               source of value creation and value accrual resides in the human talent.
fi
                               fi
                                       fi
                                            fi
                                                       fl
                And here is where the lens of the migratory-labour policies should focus
                on.
              ● Other measures can include tax holidays and tax credits for
                organizations, companies and individuals engaged in supporting OSS in
                the EU. Public funding to top universities can also incorporate a budget to
                increase research grants and salaries to the top-level academic staff.
                Certainly this stimulus will attract the best minds from NorthAmerica
                seeking to relocate to EU universities where there are no ideological
                barriers on scienti c and technological R&D&I.

   4. Innovation hubs. The EU has already launched innovation hubs across its
      member states. These are physical spaces where talent and entrepreneurship
      are gathered. The Commission and agents involved in the management of
      Innovation Hubs should be incorporated into the previous recommendations: the
      labour market, the migration policy, the grants, and integration with academics.

                                             ***
4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why? And
5. In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to increased
competitiveness and cyber resilience?

The Commission should prioritise blockchain technologies. Open, public blockchain
technologies are often developed as FOSS, but their relevance extends beyond open-
source software alone. Blockchain can serve as a lever for the technological
sovereignty of the EU. As such, it can form part of the backbone of a sustainable and
resilient EU stack. The following paragraphs explain the rationale behind this
assessment.
Digital sovereignty is de ned as the ability of governments, organisations, businesses or
individuals to maintain independent control over their digital assets, data and
operations. If we adopt this de nition provided in the article : Open Source and Digital
Sovereignty it is dif cult not to consider the role of blockchain.

Public Blockchain stack advances towards privacy-preserving architectures from layer
1, transcending to the upper layers of the stack, such as rollups, smart contracts,
storage, communication protocols, wallet software, etc. Decentralised blockchain
protocols allow societal actors to be in complete control of their data, assets and
operations.

The argument is straightforward: if each European citizen, alongside their organisations
and governments, retains control over these three elements, this directly strengthens
    fi
         fi
              fi
                     fi
     their sovereignty. In turn, EU sovereignty can be understood as the sum of sovereign
     individuals and sovereign organisations.

     The more EU–OSS integrated policies foster the growth and interoperability of public
     blockchain ecosystems, the more EU citizens and organisations will be able to shift
     towards services that best suit their needs and interests — while reducing dependency
     on large technology monopolies.

     Blockchain ecosystems align with the European Declaration on Digital Rights and
     Principles for the Digital Decade because blockchain-based digital transformation can
     put people at the centre and has demonstrated new business models that expand
     income-generation opportunities through tokenised economies. This may provide
     alternatives to the risks of labour displacement associated with automation. With open-
     source blockchain, the value is not limited to collaboration in software development and
     maintenance: it can also support broader participation in society through new
     organisational models. For example, individuals can contribute to decentralised
     autonomous organisations (DAOs) focused on climate action, the circular economy,
     education and other collective priorities (regenerative public goods) while generating
     revenues. Here is the paragraph of the Declaration that this paragraph refers to:

           (6) The EU vision for digital transformation puts people at the centre,
           empowers individuals and fosters innovative businesses. The Decision on
           the ‘Digital Decade Policy Programme 2030’ sets out the concrete digital
           targets based on four cardinal points (digital skills, digital infrastructures,
           digitalisation of businesses and of public services). The EU way for the
           digital transformation of our societies and economy encompasses in
           particular digital sovereignty in an open manner, respect for fundamental
           rights, rule of law and democracy, inclusion, accessibility, equality,
           sustainability, resilience, security, improving quality of life, the availability
           of services and respect of everyone’s rights and aspirations. It should
           contribute to a dynamic, resource ef cient, and fair economy and society
           in the EU. (EU Commission, 2023).
     There is no other technology that enables the creation of cohesive communities while
     also allowing users to switch between decentralised applications (dApps) as easily as
     connecting or disconnecting a wallet (in other words, the private and the collective
     interests nd a place to reconcile, coordinate and cooperate) .

     A credible route out of monopolistic structures is greater competition and genuine
     freedom of choice for consumers. If EU OSS policy focuses on consumer satisfaction —
     enabling users to access services that best match their preferences — then multi-sided
fi
                             fi
blockchain-based ecosystems may naturally provide enough conditions to shift away
from centralised and monopolistic digital stacks.

Finally, from a cybersecurity perspective, blockchain also offers valuable characteristics.
Multiple layers of cryptography can make these systems highly resistant to tampering
and geopolitical cyberattacks, while supporting transparency and accountability.