Ref. Ares(2026)1222750 - 03/02/2026

 Decathlon’s answer to the Call for Evidence: European Open
                    Digital Ecosystems
                                                                          03.02.2026, Brussels

Decathlon welcomes the European Commission’s initiative to establish a roadmap to support
Digital Sovereignty in the Union and appreciates the opportunity to provide feedback on the
state of the European Open Source ecosystem. As a global leader in the sporting goods
industry with a deep commitment to digital innovation, we view a thriving, collaborative
open source ecosystem as a crucial lever for ensuring European competitiveness. We
welcome the Commission’s initiatives to sustain Open Source solutions as viable, robust
alternatives to proprietary market dominance.

We believe that the adoption of open source technologies as a potent strategy to mitigate
“vendor lock-in” -situations where technological sovereignty is surrendered to a dependence
on specific vendors. By adopting open source Decathlon retains mastery of its digital tools,
allowing us to modify code to fit exact business needs and enable a significant portion of our
Value Chain, from the design of our products to the moment they reach our customers
whether through our physical stores or online deliveries. This is critical given the current
trend of increasing proprietary licensing costs and restrictive usage terms from dominant
global software editors. In this context, Open Source is not just a technical choice, but a
strategic asset ensuring freedom of usage and cost control.

The Open Source ecosystem is strong with mature organizations such as the Linux
Foundation, the Apache Software Foundation, the TODO Group that contribute extensively to
shape and grow the open source community into the lever of sovereignty it is today. We
recommend that the European Commission deepen the collaboration with such groups and
take their experience into consideration to build a resilient policy strategy. Regarding
technologies, we perceive Open Standards, Open Document Formats, Open Protocols including
the emergent protocols around AI and Agentic AI as important pieces of the ecosystem that
can be leveraged into efficient products and services should they be given enough long-term
support.

However, adoption is neither free nor transparent. The absence of licensing fees is invariably
offset by significant human capital costs for deployment, maintenance, and the infrastructure
required. Furthermore, we are concerned by the rising economic fragility of the open source
supply chain. We observe a worrying trend where open source projects, due to lack of
sustainable funding, pivot toward restrictive "Business Source Licenses" or fully proprietary
models. This "re-licensing" creates uncertainty and reticence for enterprises like ours,
effectively forcing businesses back toward established proprietary giants to avoid legal risk.

Decathlon acknowledges that for the ecosystem to thrive, corporate users must contribute
back. However, we face systemic barriers to contribution and funding:
   -​ ROI Visibility: In sectors with tight margins, contributing code is often viewed as a cost
       center without immediate Return on Investment.
   -​ Fiscal & Legal Friction: Current corporate procurement and tax frameworks treat Open
       Source sponsorships similarly to purchasing proprietary software. We face significant
        friction when attempting to sponsor individual maintainers or projects not backed by
        large foundations.
To address some of these issues, Decathlon would welcome clearer pathways and incentives
to contribute to projects developed by entities other than open source companies or
foundations such as individual open source developers. We also advocate for a “cultural
approach” to promote open source contributions as early as IT curriculums, both to educate
future developers on best practices but also to educate future decision-makers on the topic
and the benefits of adopting and contributing to the open source ecosystem.

Another barrier to adoption we observe is how procurement channels are treating open
source software in a similar way as proprietary software, specifically regarding legal rights
and security concerns, while open source software procurement represents different
challenges compared to proprietary software. We welcome any improvements to the
ecosystem such as the one brought forward by the Article 25 of the Cyber Resilience Act, the
implementation of a voluntary security attestation for open source projects could lessen
significantly the burden of security due diligence practices during the procurement process of
an open source solution.

Recommendations: In conclusion, to maximize the impact of the European open Digital
Ecosystem, Decathlon suggest:
   1.​ Collaborating with Foundations: The EU should formalize cooperation with established
       groups (Linux Foundation, Apache, TODO Group) to align policy with technical reality.
   2.​ Integrate Open Source in Education: Open Source contribution within IT curriculums
       should be incentivized to create a job-ready talent pool.
   3.​ Addressing the financial burden of Open Source maintenance : The EU must
       incentivize financial contributions to key projects through stronger tax exemption for
       companies financing open source projects. Such contributions would help sustain the
       ecosystem, enable European actors to influence the latter more proactively and reduce
       the risk of “rugpulls” in project governance.
   4.​ Supporting Open Standards : To achieve true Digital Sovereignty, the EU must prioritize
       portability standards to ensure that Open Source remains the "interoperability layer"
       that allows EU businesses to switch infrastructure providers without rebuilding their
       technology stacks.

Decathlon stands ready to collaborate with the Commission to refine these approaches,
ensuring a digital future that is open, competitive, and sovereign.

About DECATHLON
A global multi-specialist sports brand catering for everyone from beginners to top athletes,
Decathlon is an innovative manufacturer of sporting goods for all skill levels. With over 101,100
teammates and 1,817 stores worldwide, Decathlon and its teams have been working ever since
1976 to fulfil an ongoing ambition: make sport accessible to the many, helping them be
healthier and happier in a sustainable future. To reinvent the way users practice sports and
physical activity enabled by technology, we work with more than 5,000 dedicated experts
covering various digital domains like Engineering, Product, Design, Data, and Cybersecurity.

For more information: https://digital.decathlon.net/about-decathlon
Points of contact
Farid ILLIKOUD​        ​       ​      ​   ​   Christian FRULEUX
Chief Information Security Officer​   ​   ​   Legal Manager - Digital&Data
farid.illikoud@decathlon.com ​ ​      ​   ​   christian.fruleux@decathlon.com

Eli MOREAU​
Public Affairs​
eli.moreau@decathlon.com