Ref. Ares(2026)922194 - 27/01/2026

                                                                                       digitalpublicgoods.net

Response: Towards European Open Digital Ecosystems

Dear Commission Reviewer,

We welcome the opportunity to provide our perspective on the development of a European
Open Digital Ecosystem Strategy. The Digital Public Goods Alliance (DPGA) is a UN-endorsed
initiative that promotes the discovery, development, use, and investment in digital public goods
to accelerate attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals. According to the UN definition,
digital public goods (DPGs) include open source software, open data, open content collections
and open AI systems that adhere to privacy and other applicable laws and best practices, do no
harm by design and help make progress towards the SDGs.

With more than 50 members, the alliance is global in nature. We have several European
members, including the national governments of France, Germany, Estonia, and Norway, as well
as OpenForum Europe and Open Future. The following remarks do not necessarily represent the
opinion of our membership; they have been prepared and shared by the DPGA Secretariat.

Question 1: Strengths and Weaknesses

   ●​ Strengths: Europe boasts a highly active ecosystem of open-source developers whose
       values align with the principles of EU digital rights and the mission of the Digital Public
       Goods Alliance. The substantial number of DPGs on the registry (over 230 to date) and
       the active role of European partners in the global DPG ecosystem demonstrate Europe’s
       commitment to a collaborative, transparent approach to digital sovereignty. An emphasis
       on open source allows Europe to tap into global skills and build trust and autonomy
       through transparency.
   ●​ Weaknesses: There is a lack of professionalised governance within public
       administrations to manage open source lifecycles effectively. Furthermore, much of the
       value from open source projects is currently captured by tech giants rather than local
       European actors, thereby limiting domestic economic benefits.
   ●​ Barriers: A major barrier is the "maintenance debt" of critical upstream projects that
       undergird many digital services. Additionally, a fragmented data ecosystem and data
       silos, as well as legal uncertainties regarding training data, prevent the development of
       European-based AI-driven solutions at scale that are built on open, reusable components
       that could qualify as DPGs (open data, open source software, open models).
Question 2: Added Value of Open Source and Open Data

   ●​ Sovereignty through Transparency: Open source and open data reduce dependence
      on non-transparent technologies, allowing for verifiable and trustworthy digital
      infrastructure, a core requirement for true digital sovereignty. The power of an open
      source approach to the development of sovereign software and advanced AI systems lies
      in the ability to collaborate with others and tap into a global skills ecosystem while being
      able to fully own and scrutinise a shared solution based on its open nature. This
      advantage is essential to national security and the strategic autonomy of nations.
   ●​ Concrete Examples: The use of open-source middleware such as Simpl within data
      spaces ensures that public-sector data is not only available but also technically
      interoperable across different systems and countries. Furthermore, recognised digital
      public goods (DPG) such as the Mozilla Common Voice dataset and compar:IA, a web
      platform developed by the French Ministry of Culture that allows citizens to compare the
      performance of large language models and, thereby, create alignment datasets to
      improve accuracy of LLMs, demonstrate the impact of DPGs for the development of
      context-specific, localised AI solutions.

Question 3: Concrete Policy Recommendations

A. Scaling Upstream Funding

   ●​ Establish a EU Sovereign Tech Fund (EU-STF): Integrate the EU-STF into the
      2028-2034 budget to provide sustainable "operational maintenance" for critical
      open-source components that are essential for a wide range of digital services, including
      digital public goods. An EU-STF should complement innovation grants to enable
      long-term security and professional maintainer support.
   ●​ Include other funding vehicles, such as retrospective impact funding (e.g., via
      Hypercerts), to reward mission-driven open source projects and digital public goods that
      create proven public value.

B. Institutionalising Governance through OSPOs

   ●​ Mandate OSPOs in Public Administrations: Require all EU agencies and Member
      States to establish Open Source Programme Offices (OSPOs). These units serve as
      organisational tissue that coordinate open source strategy, manage compliance, and
      translate procurement intent into sovereign digital outcomes, including by leveraging
      digital public goods such as X-Road for public service delivery.

C. Leveraging Open Data and Open Standards
   ●​ High-Value Dataset Incentives: Expand the list of high-value datasets that must be
       made freely available in machine-readable formats to fuel the creation of open-source
       applications and AI models. This effort should focus especially on enabling the
       development of open source, small language models that outperform established LLMs in
       specific tasks. By focusing on smaller, highly performing models, development and
       inference costs can be significantly reduced, and adherence to the DPG Standard is
       simplified.
   ●​ Legal Clarity for Training: Explicitly confirm that existing EU directives (Articles 3 and 4
       of the DSM Directive) allow for AI model training on all lawfully accessible data.
   ●​ Data Altruism Incentives: Use the Data Governance Act to create financial and
       reputational incentives for "data altruism," and simplify the rulebook. This effort will
       boost the availability of open data provided by private actors for public interest AI
       development and open (source) AI models, which is an essential component for
       increased sovereignty in AI development.
   ●​ Support Open Standards in AI development that enable the orchestration of smaller
       models to tackle complex problems (multi-agent systems), helping move away from
       non-sovereign, costly, monolithic AI models.

D. Strategic Procurement Reform

   ●​ Standardised TCO and "Open by Default": Mandate a Total Cost of Ownership
       (TCO) methodology in all public tenders to account for the long-term costs of vendor
       lock-in. Publicly funded software should be released as open source by default to ensure
       maximum reuse and efficiency, accelerating the creation of digital public goods.
       Examples of DPGs created by public administrations include the French La Suite Docs
       and La Suite Drive.

E. Digital Public Infrastructure

   ●​ "DPG-First" for DPI: Mandate an "Open Source by Default" policy for all European
       Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) projects (e.g., EU Digital Identity Wallets; data sharing
       infrastructure). This ensures foundational layers are sovereign, transparent, auditable, and
       reusable across Member States, while prioritising the adoption of existing DPG solutions,
       such as the Estonian X-Road, which has been implemented in more than 20 regions and
       countries globally, including the German state of Schleswig-Holstein.
Question 4: Technology Areas to Prioritise

   ●​ Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI): Prioritise open-source tools and DPGs that facilitate
      secure digital identity and data exchange, such as MOSIP and X-Road. The DPGA hosts a
      collection of proven DPGs for DPI on its website for reference.
   ●​ Social Technologies: Prioritise open-source tools and DPGs that facilitate decentralised
      social discourse and public participation, such as Decidim, Pol.is and Mastodon. These
      solutions should be adopted and championed by public authorities at the EU level and in
      member states to signal a shift away from proprietary big-tech solutions and support
      democratic deliberation.
   ●​ Public-Interest AI: Fund the creation, maintenance, and inference utility of a family of
      permanently open, democratically governed, state-of-the-art European foundation models
      for public-interest AI solutions that can serve as a shared technological backbone.

Question 5: Sectors for Competitiveness and Resilience

   ●​ Public Administration & Governance: Ensure alignment with existing EU strategies
      and initiatives, such as the Digital Commons EDIC. By utilising the DC-EDIC, proven
      open-source solutions, and DPGs such as La Suite Docs and LA Suite Drive, these
      solutions can be scaled across European governments, increasing their autonomy and
      sovereignty over their own infrastructure. The DPG Standard and DPG Registry provide a
      clear, internationally recognised framework and source for discovering high-quality,
      open-source solutions for national-level implementation, thereby strengthening the EU’s
      digital foundations and its global leadership in transparent digital governance.