Ref. Ares(2026)1225452 - 03/02/2026

Call for Evidence - European Open Digital Ecosystem Strategy
                     Erlang Ecosystem Foundation (EEF) position
We, the Erlang Ecosystem Foundation (EEF) – a global community of people who create and work
in several programming languages (mostly Elixir, Erlang and Gleam) that are based on the Erlang
Virtual Machine (VM) – have for the last two years been working on community tooling and
infrastructure to address cybersecurity issues, as well as NIS2 and CRA compliance. We are
already the default CVE Numbering Authority (CNA) for packages in our three language spaces.
Similarly, we intend to become a Steward as defined in the CRA.

The Community’s Security Working Group is very active and has a comprehensive roadmap for
CRA compliance. For the last 18 months we have had a very productive joint CRA compliance effort
that was funded by Herrmann Ultraschall, who have submitted their own statements here.

  This submission provides evidence from the perspective of a small US based non-profit
  organization developing community support for long-lived open source projects in the public
  interest.​
  Our Ecosystem covers three computer languages and their associated tools and libraries
  which are all ultimately based on open source virtual machine technology developed at
  Ericsson in Sweden over 40 years ago.​
  The community has many thousands of actively involved developers and maintainers
  covering over 60 thousand source code repos and packages.​

1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source
sector? What are the main barriers that hamper (i) adoption and
maintenance of high-quality and secure open source; and (ii)
sustainable contributions to open-source communities?
We echo the position and sentiments of the Internet Society Switzerland Chapter (ISOC-CH)
submission.

2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private
sectors?
We echo the position and sentiments of the Internet Society Switzerland Chapter (ISOC-CH)
submission.

The value of OSS in the economy can be only partially estimated based on a fraction of the activity.
On a per-product basis the value received for OSS by a manufacturer, minus the expenditure on
direct OSS contribution is effectively negative because manufacturers do not, as a rule, even
estimate or account for the value received in OSS.
3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to
support the development and growth of the EU open-source sector
and contribute to the EU’s technological sovereignty and
cybersecurity agenda?
  a.​ Get serious about “Public Money, Public Code”
  b.​ Adjust the public procurement choice algorithm from just “lowest bidder wins” to a method
      that ensures that upstream libraries and projects that are part of the bid are also covered for
      maintenance and support. (Ensure that intermediaries, system houses or integrators do not
      just undercut or free-ride off upstream projects)

 We call upon the EC to leverage existing hooks in the CRA and its implementation:

    1.​ Hone the voluntary security attestation program into an instrument that can
        expose the full maintenance costs of open source software. Projects should clearly
        attest to their costs (direct and indirect) and maintenance work effort and indicate
        their level of cost coverage from downstream consumers (e.g. “this project is at
        present only 25% (say) fully funded”).
    2.​ Establish that ‘due diligence’ under Article 13(5) involves verifying that any
        integrated components are from ‘full-funded’ sustainable projects.
    3.​ Execute the Union-wide dependency assessment (in ADCO CRA) to further
        increase visibility into the role of open source as the foundation of our current digital
        ecosystem

4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why?
  a.​ European based cloud infrastructure with compatible APIs for running workloads across
      member states.
  b.​ Scalable, fault-tolerant and efficient cloud services that add utility at low compute overhead.
  c.​ Technology with European or independent (non-commercial) governance
  d.​ Technology that increases leverage of European OSS and innovation instead of solution
      providers driving toward proprietary solutions or approaches that reinforce non-sovereign
      outcomes.
  e.​ Deliberately seek OSS solutions instead of commercial offerings, otherwise they will not
      mature or become viable sovereign alternatives. Choose technical applications of increasing
      complexity and scale to manage risk, but at the same time invest directly in OSS
      development and deployment to drive the maturity.
  f.​ To extend the above point, find ways to incentivise European companies to develop such
      projects and services.
5. In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to
increased competitiveness and cyber resilience?
     [no response]