Submission to the EU Consultation on: »The European Open Ref. Ares(2026)1206176 - 03/02/2026
                                                         Digital
Ecosystem Strategy«

February 2026
   • https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/16213-
     European-Open-Digital-Ecosystems_en

Digital Sovereignty and the Role of
Free / Open Source Software
With the election of Donald Trump, people in Europe realized how much they are
dependent on US tech giants. Thus, there is now an initiative to move towards
»Digital Sovereignty.« This is good, but it should have happened much earlier. The
advantages of Free Software / Open Source were always there, and many people have
pointed them out. Already 20 years ago, we were fighting against software patents in
Europe (which would have been devastating for Open Source software and which
would have increased the power of tech corporations even more). Then, after the
revelations of Edward Snowden (2013), there would have been even more good
reasons to switch to Free / Open Source software, as we now know how much the US
is using the tech giants to spy on us.
But here we are in 2026. So, better late than never.
While Free / Open Source software is a cornerstone of Digital Sovereignty, it also has
a lot more advantages. It not only brings »sovereignty« for Europe but sovereignty for
customers (both private and corporate). It brings independence and digital self-
determination for all of us.
In order to really understand this, one needs to understand how the IT business (and
the commercial software business in particular) really works*

The Economics of Software

If you look at the manufacturing costs of most software (that is mostly the labour
costs), then you find that the prices of software are usually one, two, or even three
orders of magnitude higher than the production costs. So there is a 1,000% or
10,000% profit margin. In the end, someone has to pay for the yachts of Larry Ellison
(Oracle), just to name one example. (Where the yacht does not hurt us that much, the
fact that he also buys political influence and finances fascist politics is more
concerning.)
Having such high profit margins seems unusual. How can this work? Well, software
always tends towards a monopoly. There are two factors that play a key role here
1.) Zero marginal costs: Once software is developed, it can be given away for any
price. In case a competitor is on the horizon, the company with the »market leader«
status can easily crush them. After all, their software has already been developed and
paid for, and they can lower costs to drive out competitors.
2.) Vendor Lock-In: Due to its complexity, software already has a much higher
tendency towards »lock-in.« Once you use a certain software to, e.g., create
documents, you are dependent on this software in order to open your own documents.
Or, once you have trained your team to use a certain software, their know-how would
become obsolete when you switch to something else, etc. While these lock-in effects
are there, commercial software vendors are usually very skilled in maximizing these
(e.g., Microsoft had to be forced by lawsuits to document the protocol specifications
of their mail servers, the »Exchange-Wire protocol«). There are a lot of more or less
subtle ways to increase the »lock-in.«
In the end, the mechanism that determines the price of software is comparable to
how hijackers determine the ransom for a hostage. The question to ask is: how much
is the customer willing to pay because switching to an alternative product would be
so painful? And of course, one of the considerations there is: how much money do
they have? E.g., companies give out their product to schools and education for a low
price: they are happy that these will get the children hooked on their product. It is
also a bit like the sales paradigm of the drug dealer: the first shot is free.

Why Open Source is the Better Choice

So, when it comes to the question of what can be done in order to foster Free / Open
Source software, a key element is the question of how to avoid the lock-in
mechanisms.
The huge margins that commercial software has, of course, are paid by European
consumers and European companies. But the monetary costs are not even the biggest
problem. As has been already mentioned: with commercial, closed-source software,
there is always the risk that hidden surveillance and back-doors are present. Due to
the lock-in, there is also less flexibility to change software and, as software is a main
component of many business processes, also less flexibility for the business. Free /
Open Source software can be much more easily and quickly used and adopted. (E.g.,
Google would not have been able to build their search empire without the availability
of Linux.)
Commercial software is also often lower quality. As the vendors understand that the
customer has little choice in switching to an alternative, they are often lazy in fixing
bugs or implementing useful features, and customers just have to put up with this.
The development of Free / Open Source software allows software development costs
to be shared among many users and companies, but without giving absolute control
over the software to only one company. We have an »economy of scale« without
monopoly control.
There needs to be a special focus on AI. Here, we are still in the early stages, and it
should be possible to steer the future in the direction of »Open Source / Open
Weights AI.«
So, from a purely liberal-market economy point of view: Free / Open Source software
is a much better choice. Of course, this also points towards the fact that cooperation
is much more efficient than capitalist competition. As our society has already
transitioned towards a »knowledge society,« this model of cooperative production is
much more adequate, and capitalism is already past its expiry date.

Concrete Measures for the EU

So, when it comes to the concrete measures that the EU could provide to foster Open
Source and our »Digital Sovereignty,« we need to focus on the above-mentioned
»lock-in« effects. Here is a list of concrete measures:
   • Education: As »know-how« is an important factor in the lock-in mechanism,
     Free / Open Source software must be made mandatory in education.
   • Public Sector: The EU administration itself, federal and local governments,
     and all public sectors shall be compelled to switch to Free / Open Source
     software as much as possible. (Often such software already exists, and in other
     cases, it must be developed. Due to the mentioned lock-in effects, the switch
     can sometimes be painful and also somewhat expensive, but will save costs in
     the medium and long-term.)
   • Critical Infrastructure: Mandatory use of Open Source (the EU should also
     mandate the use of Open Source software in critical infrastructure, also when
     operated by private companies) to increase resilience, security, and
     sovereignty.
   • Tax Advantages: If a company switches to Open Source (and thus also
     potentially contributes to that software), that should be rewarded by lower
     taxes. Also, companies that provide support for Free / Open Source software
     should be treated as companies that work for the common good and should
     have tax benefits.
   • Higher Taxes on Closed-Source: On the other side, it would be good to have
     higher taxes on closed-source, commercial software. This money can then be
     used to finance the development of key Open Source projects.
   • Open Weights: Large LLM systems were trained with the entirety of human
     knowledge. It is therefore logical to demand that the »weights/parameters« in
     which this knowledge is stored in AI systems must also belong to all of
     humanity. Large AI systems should therefore always be »Open Source and Open
     Weight.« Consequently, it is necessary to explicitly exempt this area from the
     protection of (almost always extremely questionable) so-called »intellectual
     property rights.« Human knowledge must belong to us all.
   • Incubator Projects: Often, only small projects would be needed to help get an
     »Open Source Ecosystem« kick-started. The EU and national governments
     should therefore help to finance key projects. A handful of developers can
     already produce a lot.
   • Legal Protections: Fight against software patents and other ways where the
     legal system is set up to give advantage to tech giants. (While the EU rejected
     software patents in 2004/2005, the EU also helped to create the »Unified Patent
     Court,« where there is the danger that software patents are reintroduced. It is a
     big scandal that the EU helped to create a legislative body that is outside the
     legal control of the EU!)
   • Open Standards: Enforce the use of Open Standards. Open standards reduce
     the potential of »lock-in.« But Open Standards are not enough: no specification
     for a standard must be allowed to become »standard« unless there is a good
     and well-maintained Free / Open Source reference implementation. The EU
     must play an important role here within the bodies of international standards
     organizations (like IEEE, etc.).

Digital Sovereignty in the Era of Cloud Computing

The trend towards cloud computing needs a few special considerations regarding
digital sovereignty:
If your software does not run on your own hardware and your data is not stored on
your own servers, we have an additional dependency. So, European companies and
organizations should make sure to carefully consider where the cloud really makes
sense. While the cloud allows some flexibility (e.g., setting up a new service within
hours or minutes without the need to order new hardware), there are usually no cost
savings for long-term workloads.
Dependency on the cloud provider is even higher when higher-level services are
consumed (PaaS and SaaS). So, in order to keep a high degree of digital sovereignty:
   • Avoid PaaS and SaaS and only use IaaS: On IaaS, only Free / Open Source
     software should be used. This would help to change cloud providers later or to
     bring back workloads on-premises.
   • License Preferences: As cloud providers can use Open Source without
     contributing to it, there should be a preference for Open Source licenses that
     mandate the availability of source code for online services (e.g., AGPL – GNU
     Affero General Public License).
   • European Infrastructure: Europe should build its own cloud offerings based
     on Free Software / Open Source.
   • The Problem with US-Owned Subsidiaries: Using a US cloud provider who
     promises to host in Europe and only operate with European personnel is not
     enough as long as all of their software stack is directly dependent on the closed-
     source, US-based parent company.

   • Franz Schäfer (Mond) schaefer@mond.at