Ref. Ares(2026)1200853 - 03/02/2026

     Call for Evidence - European Open Digital Ecosystem
                            Strategy
              Internet Society Switzerland Chapter (ISOC-CH) position

We, the Switzerland Chapter of the Internet Society – a global non-governmental organization
of technologists, programmers, and digital rights activists – are participating as experts in the
NLNet Foundation led NGI Zero consortium. As such we want to stress that when devising a
European Open Digital Ecosystem Strategy it is important to understand that:
  • Free and Open-Source Software (FOSS) is a collaborative and global phenomenon. While
    a lot of FOSS is created in Europe, even more is produced outside of it. The value FOSS
    provides is not determined by its place of origin, but rather its usefulness and
    the four freedoms to use, study, modify and share the code. The EU should not
    pitch FOSS producers against each other or hamper international collaboration.
  • A lot of FOSS is currently developed non-commercially by individuals, academics, founda-
    tions or public administrations; often with severe resource constraints. Those non-commercial
    projects nevertheless deserve support as they play an important role in the FOSS ecosys-
    tem as depedencies of (e.g., a programming language or low-level libraries) or platforms for
    (e.g., Linux distributions) commercial FOSS services. Additionally, every FOSS project is a
    digital public good, whose importance for the achievement of the Sustainable Development
    Goals the UN has recognized in the Report of the Secretary-General Roadmap for Digital
    Cooperation from 2020, and in the provision of which markets often fail.
With that in mind, here are our answers to the questions outlined in the Call for Evidence:

What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector? What are the
main barriers that hamper (i) adoption and maintenance of high-quality and secure
open source; and (ii) sustainable contributions to open-source communities?
The core strength of the European FOSS movement are its active contributors consisting of
developers, maintainers, technical writers and translators. They are the basis for vibrant commu-
nities (e.g., FOSDEM, FrOSCon) which produce widely successful end-user projects (e.g., KDE,
Nextcloud, Framasoft, CryptPad, LibreOffice, Yunohost, Mastodon) as well as developer tools
and libraries (e.g., curl, Proxmox), infrastructure (e.g., Codeberg), and Linux distributions (e.g.,
SuSE).
The central weakness of the FOSS movement in Europe is its niche existence in the public mind.
FOSS is totally overlooked by political and business decision makers, educators, and the general
public – despite being part of practically every electronic device. This lack of public awareness
about the existence of FOSS and its importance for our democratic societies limits the usefulness
and growth of FOSS in Europe.
The adoption of FOSS on a large scale is hampered by:
  • Public administrations and businesses experiencing high switching costs from currently
    used proprietary solutions which cause vendor lock-in and strategic dependencies on third
    parties.
  • Lack of widespread familiarity with FOSS tools in the workforce of public administrations or
    private businesses because educational institutions tend to introduce people to proprietary
    software rather than (or at least in addition to) FOSS alternatives.
  • Lobbying efforts by proprietary software vendors at the municipal, state, and supranational
    levels that actively discourage FOSS adoption, for example by falsely portraying it as
    inherently insecure or amateurish.
The resulting smaller user base of FOSS translates directly to fewer contributions to and reduced
commercial opportunities for FOSS projects.

What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors? Please
provide concrete examples, including the factors (such as cost, risk, lock-in, security,
innovation, among others) that are most important to assess the added value.
The overarching benefit of using FOSS is strategic agency: the ability to act according to one’s
own needs without relying on third parties. This is especially crucial for public administrations
and critical infrastructure operators.
Concrete benefits of the usage of FOSS include:
  • Enhanced security and resilience
       – Lower security risks thanks to transparent development processes which allow for faster
         vulnerability detection and thorough security audits (e.g., ensuring the absence of
         hidden backdoors).
       – Improved supply-chain security because all software dependencies are openly visible
         and verifiable.
       – Greater resistance to pressure from hostile state actors, who cannot easily compel
         vendors to insert backdoors or surveillance mechanisms.
  • Boosted innovation and competition
       – Elimination of vendor lock-in enables genuine competition, as organizations can switch
         providers without prohibitive data migration costs.
       – Developers can build upon and improve existing FOSS without requiring approvals or
         licensing agreements.
       – Lower barriers to entry for new market participants, fostering a competitive ecosystem.
  • Better cost profile
       – Cost sharing opportunities as interested parties can pool resources to fund feature
         development and maintenance.
       – Cost predictability because there are no unexpected license fee increases or forced
         upgrades.
  • Influence on development
       – Development stays aligned with users’ needs because unwanted anti-features (such
         as arbitrary usage quotas, tracking, or attention-grabbing mechanisms) can be easily
         removed.
       – If the current vendor fails to provide required functionality, third parties can step in
         and deliver it.
  • Accountability and transparency
        – Public auditability: Allows for democratic oversight of the public sector’s digital
          infrastructure.
        – Regulatory compliance: Gives organizations the ability to verify that systems meet
          regulatory requirements.

What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support the
development and growth of the EU open-source sector and contribute to the EU’s
technological sovereignty and cybersecurity agenda?
The strongest lever for the strengthening of the FOSS ecosystem in Europe is the widespread
adoption of FOSS in state institutions (public administration, schools, universities, hospitals, etc.)
as active users (contributing bug reports, translations, and code) rather than passive consumers
of proprietary software. In addition to massively increasing the digital sovereignty of European
institutions, it strengthens the FOSS ecosystem in a myriad of ways:
  a) Sustainable funding through “Public Money, Public Code” procurement: By redirecting the
     public funds currently spent on proprietary licenses toward the development, maintenance,
     and security auditing of FOSS, the existing ecosystem of individual developers, maintainers,
     translators, businesses, foundations, universities, and government institutions will become
     more innovative, more secure, and more economically sustainable.
  b) Spillover effects and commercial opportunities: Adoption of FOSS by the public and
     educational sectors will lead to spillover effects into businesses which in turn opens up
     commercial opportunities for FOSS developers like customization work, hosting services,
     and support contracts.
  c) Community growth and contribution: Wider use of FOSS solutions will encourage more
     people to contribute to FOSS, thereby reducing the burden currently placed on its developers
     and maintainers.
The shift from proprietary software to FOSS in public institutions will be neither simple nor
quick, since it requires training, data migration, and cultural change. But it remains necessary
for geopolitical reasons and, if executed well, will also strengthen the broader FOSS ecosystem.
Mandating the use of FOSS licenses for publicly procured software and requiring data to be
stored in standard open formats in the upcoming European Public Procurement Act, for example,
would significantly accelerate the growth of FOSS in Europe.
In addition to adopting FOSS tools in everyday life of public administrations, educational
institutions and businesses, it would be helpful to raise societal awareness for why the principles
of FOSS are essential for reclaiming control over digital tools which – depending on how they are
built – can either threaten or strengthen our open and democratic societies.

What technology areas should be prioritised and why?
Due to the general lack of resources in FOSS development, a lot of the work in FOSS is currently
done by very commited and skilled volunteers in their spare time. This constrains what the
FOSS ecosystem can achieve. Investment should therefore prioritize existing, widely used but
underfunded FOSS projects (libraries, programs, operating systems) and infrastructure (code
forges, CI resources, reproducible build farms) because these components provide an immediate
utility and are proven solutions rather than speculative investments.
In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to increased competitive-
ness and cyber resilience?
Every sector would benefit from the strengthening of FOSS as it already is the – unfortunately
widely neglected – backbone of our digital infrastructure1 . FOSS is in use everywhere, including
critical sectors like financial services, healthcare, energy, education and public administration.
The reasons for why it would make the sectors more competitive and resilient, are the same as
outlined in the answer to question 2.

  1 One would be hard-pressed to find a product which contains digital components but does not make use of

FOSS.