Ref. Ares(2026)1225953 - 04/02/2026

From the perspective of an EU citizen as well as an open-source developer and maintainer for the
last 23 years, I highly appreciate this call for evidence. It shows both appreciation of the work and
dedication of open-source developers as well as the willingness to listen to and support open-source
developers.

Answering the questions from the call for evidence:
1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source
sector? What are the main barriers that hamper (i) adoption and
maintenance of high-quality and secure open source; and (ii)
sustainable contributions to open-source communities?
Strengths of the EU open-source sector:
   •   All areas of open source software have a strong developer community in the EU: From
       cloud and server software to IoT, from operating systems to libraries and applications. EU
       open-source projects and developers cover diverse areas such as disaster management,
       cybersecurity, robotics and drones, document management and productivity, browsers and
       web servers, real-time communication, server orchestration, firmware and user interfaces.
   •   For each vertical standard currently being written for the Cyber Resilience Act, there are
       multiple open-source software projects usable as reference implementation and testing
       ground to validate the standard before harmonization. This enables rapid progress for the
       standard as well as rapid adaptation of open-source projects to those emerging standards.
   •   Multiple open-source events are headquartered in the EU: FOSDEM, the world’s biggest
       open source developer event, where delegates of the European Commission have presented
       on current developments (e.g. CRA) and engaged with the community. Other open-source
       events in the EU with a multi-national audience include FrOSCon, T-DOSE, LinuxDay
       Vorarlberg, Chemnitzer Linux-Tage and others. These events foster collaboration and
       exchange of ideas, but they also allow lesser-known projects to present themselves to a
       larger audience.
   •   The EU open-source sector is also very focused on enabling citizens to get control of their
       own devices and their own data, aligning nicely with one aspect of digital sovereignty.
   •   Quite a few innovative open-source projects have a majority of their developers from the
       EU.
Weaknesses of the EU open-source sector:
   •   Public sector procurement of open-source software remains difficult. Quite a few
       government agencies require a public call for tender to buy licenses with lots of red tape
       before a solution can be used. Using open source runs afoul of this process because usually
       it is not possible to buy a license for open source software due to it being free. There also
       may not be an officially authorized solution/support provider for a given piece of open
       source software because the original developer places no restrictions on who can support the
       software.
   •   Public perception of open-source software: “If it’s free, it’s not worth anything”. This
       prejudice also hampers adoption of open-source software to a significant degree.
   •   Lack of marketing: Due to quite a few open-source projects not being done for profit, quite a
       few developers cannot afford to create and publish marketing material or to invest in
       lobbying. This puts those projects at a significant disadvantage compared to non-open-
       source software being sold for a huge profit.
   •   While open-source projects do come in various sizes, the majority of projects are either
       single-maintainer projects with occasional contributions from other developers or single-
       developer projects with no other contributors. Most of these projects are maintained in the
       spare time of their developer(s). This is even more prevalent in software libraries used by
       other projects. As such, there is a real risk of those persons having to stop or pause
       development due to other obligations (work, family, health).
2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private
sectors? Please provide concrete examples, including the factors (such
as cost, risk, lock-in, security, innovation, among others) that are most
important to assess the added value.
Others have said this better than I can do it.

3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to
support the development and growth of the EU open-source sector and
contribute to the EU’s technological sovereignty and cybersecurity
agenda?
   •   Meet the developers where they are. Send representatives to all open source conferences in
       the EU and engage with people there. Contact open source projects via their forums, mailing
       lists and other means to get feedback from them.
   •   Provide a legal hotline for open-source developers. There is quite a bit of uncertainty, fear
       and doubt and helping developers understand the landscape would help a lot.
   •   Provide funding for part-time maintenance of open source projects
   •   Help assess infrastructure of opensource projects for sovereignty
   •   Repeat this call for evidence every year

4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why?
   •   Firmware: This software controls hardware initialization and enforces control of what
       operating system and other software can be run on a given device. (Note: This is essentially
       the “Boot Managers” products mentioned in Annex III of the CRA.) As such, the entity
       controlling the firmware also has full control over whether the software running on a given
       device, making this relevant for both avoiding vendor lock-in and having digital sovereignty
       in devices.
   •   Network devices: They provide the backbone of our digital infrastructure, but are seen as
       appliances instead of computers with open-source components. There are pre-existing open
       source projects in the EU taking care of this. Strengthening them would help.
   •   Operating system distributions: They provide a trusted source of software.
5. In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to
increased competitiveness and cyber resilience?
Pretty much all sectors.