Ref. Ares(2026)1206730 - 03/02/2026

                 YGREKY
                 31, impasse du Café                         @ : contact@ygreky.com
                 38350 Saint-Laurent-en-Beaumont, France     www : https://ygreky.com

Subject : Answer to "Call for evidence - Ares(2026)69111"

Ygreky welcomes the discussion about the strategic approach to open source, and
we provide our feedback based on our experience in open source security, especially
embedded.

1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector? What
are the main barriers that hamper (i) adoption and maintenance of high-quality
and secure open source; and (ii) sustainable contributions to open-source
communities?

The EU open-source sector is strong in micro and small companies (as can be
observed from speakers’ affiliations at FOSDEM and local conferences).

Those small companies, often rooted in local communities, are frequently
subcontractors for larger companies operating across multiple EU countries and
worldwide.

Some small EU open-source-focused companies operate mainly on a local market,
while others operate at the European level and beyond.

The main barrier to sustainable open-source communities, in our view, is the lack of
short-term incentives to support open source. A company may use open source in its
products without contributing anything (neither development effort nor financial
support) for years. At the same time, other open-source companies, including micro
and small ones, actively contribute, for example by employing open-source
maintainers. This creates an imbalance and an unfair advantage for “free riders”.

2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors?
Please provide concrete examples, including the factors (such as cost, risk, lock-
in, security, innovation, among others) that are most important to assess the
added value.

All the factors mentioned represent added value for open-source solutions. Some
examples include:

   •   The use of standard interfaces on a SoM (system on module), combined with
       the availability of source code for hardware support, allows users (including
       other vendors) to continue using and improving the hardware support of a
                 YGREKY
                 31, impasse du Café                         @ : contact@ygreky.com
                 38350 Saint-Laurent-en-Beaumont, France     www : https://ygreky.com

       board even if the original manufacturer discontinues the product or goes
       bankrupt.
   •   Open-source software enables the development of new and innovative
       solutions. A good example is Kubernetes, which enabled automatic scaling of
       services, and the Yocto Project, which allows hardware vendors to focus on
       their added value rather than on the common software stack needed to
       support a board.
   •   The use of open-source solutions mitigates the risk of relying on a new or
       innovative vendor. If such a vendor fails, the user may take over support of the
       solution, providing an alternative to migrating to a different vendor.
   •   Open standards enable the development of innovative solutions by simplifying
       integration. An example is the ecosystem of Matrix clients, which all use the
       same common communication protocol.

3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support the
development and growth of the EU open-source sector and contribute to the
EU’s technological sovereignty and cybersecurity agenda?

Ensure that solutions developed using public funds are mandatorily released as open
source.

In public procurement, require a list of open-source components used (in a form of a
machine-readable SBOM - Software Bill of Materils) and guarantees that appropriate
funds have been allocated to improve those open-source solutions, preferably by
financing maintainers’ work, quality assurance, and bug fixes, ensuring the long-
term sustainability of these projects. It is important to NOT encourage only
submitting new features, without the corresponding support for code review and
maintenance.

Make it mandatory to justify the use of non-open-source solutions by public bodies.

Develop a truly open-source European vulnerability database (distributed) and
vulnerability intelligence infrastructure.

Create an European structure for a non-profit that is simple to use and maintain for a
distributed team, with changing geographical distribution (allowing the paperwork
in any of the EU main languages, including English; common and simple accounting
rules) so that distributed open source teams are encouraged to create their
supporting organizations in Europe.

4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why?

Embedded base software (operating systems, bootloaders, distribution-building
tools, compilers, runtimes, basic libraries), as these components are used across
                YGREKY
                31, impasse du Café                         @ : contact@ygreky.com
                38350 Saint-Laurent-en-Beaumont, France     www : https://ygreky.com

entire software stacks and investment in these areas has a cascading impact on
other types of software.

European hardware supply (processors using open-source architectures, open
hardware in general), as these create a stable foundation on which other products
can be built.

Open-source AI models that take privacy into account, especially self-hosted ones, to
enable the development of innovative solutions.

5. In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to increased
competitiveness and cyber resilience?

The use of open source is already nearly universal in software development, with the
main challenge being the sustainability of the model.

Increased use of open source in the public sector, especially in education, would lead
to better open-source literacy among the general public in the long term.