Ref. Ares(2026)1225943 - 04/02/2026

Response to call for evidence: European open digital ecosystems
To introduce myself, I’ve been contributing to FLOSS (free, libre and open source software) in my
spare time for about a decade now, and have been paid to work on open source for about two years.
As a Czech citizen, I mostly have experience with Czech government processes. I’d like to share a
few short points on the ways Europe can take advantage of and support FLOSS, and the barriers that
currently exist; to complement feedback by others who’ve taken the time to offer a holistic view.

Open source in public procurement
In the Czech Republic (and likely other member states), procurement of IT solutions by public
institutions is a pain point. Over the years, most institutions have adopted a very cautious approach,
relying on references, required academic degrees and revenue numbers to filter candidate
companies, reducing competition and thus inflating prices.
This approach specifically means open source solutions are almost never offered, since most “open
source companies” are younger and smaller than their traditional competitors. I believe that open
source aligns with the goals of the public sector, so care should be taken to ensure that open source
solutions have a fair chance of being selected.
I would personally like to see a move away from pre-selecting companies based on whether they are
“big enough” and “established enough” to deliver, and more toward judging the quality of their
proposed solution from the start.
Ideally, all software created by and for public institutions should be published as open source to
increase transparency and facilitate reuse, but separate measures would still be required to give open
source a fair chance when a full solution, not software development, is being procured.

Open source as a tool for trust
Ordinarily, the main guarantee that a product purchased by a business will function as advertised
and won’t, for example, contain backdoors, is contract law. These guarantees can sadly break down
across international borders and there have been import bans placed on companies due to security
concerns. This kind of restriction is, however, heavy-handed and generally reactive.
When companies procure open source solutions from the start, they can check their security with
independent audits. With restrictions on which technology can be used in critical infrastructure
becoming more common, open source should be prioritised to gain a greater degree of trust in our
technology without restricting competition.

Cloud services and open source
The full benefits of open source software are realised when its users are in control of the software
and in a position to change the code. While we can’t expect every organisation to manage their own
servers, I believe that at least larger institutions should prefer to do so when possible. While cloud
providers all partly use open source software behind their services, their customers don’t get the
anti-lock-in and sovereignty benefits.