Ref. Ares(2026)1224159 - 03/02/2026

EU Open Digital Ecosystem Strategy
1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open source sector? What are the main
barriers that hamper (i) adoption and maintenance of high-quality and secure open source;
and (ii) sustainable contributions to open source communities?

The strength of the open source sector in Europe, is the fundamental principle linking the
emerging European Digital Commons paradigm with the Rule of Law, framed as a constitutional
necessity for maintaining the European Union's legal sovereignty and democratic transparency
against the extra-territorial influence and monopolies. As highlighted in the European
Commission 2025 Rule of Law Report, digitalization and open government strategies are key
elements for strengthening trust in the public system. In this context, the adoption of open
source software guarantees transparency by enabling independent verification of algorithms,
ensures neutrality through open standards and fosters accessibility via an “Open by Design”
approach. This vision is rooted in Europe’s history of creating open, global public goods like the
World Wide Web and is strongly supported by economic evidence showing that investments in
open source software have a significant impact on EU GDP. By integrating open source
solutions with the Rule of Law (transparency, neutrality, and accessibility), the transition to the
European Digital Commons evolves modern constitutionalism into the digital space, ensuring
that Europe's future digital governance is mediated by transparent, accountable technologies
and democratic processes, rather than unilateral terms of service.​
While we lack exhaustive visibility into the overall status of open source software managed by
EU maintainers and foundations, there is a growing concern that the health of the Community
is being affected by regulatory uncertainty.

A primary challenge facing the open source sector is regulatory fragmentation. This issue is
further exacerbated by the heterogeneous transposition of the directives across Member

1 di 6

PagoPA S.p.A.

società per azioni con socio unico

capitale sociale di euro 1,00

0,000 interamente versato

sede legale in Roma, Piazza Colonna 370, CAP 00187

n. di iscrizione a Registro Imprese di Roma, CF e P.IVA 15376371009
States. For instance, while Italy’s Digital Administration Code provides explicit and clear
provisions for the adoption and reuse of open source solutions, other Member States operate
under different frameworks, leading to significant disparities in how these solutions are
implemented and managed and making interoperability a challenge.

From an administrative standpoint, the public sector faces significant barriers to supporting the
long term sustainability of open source projects. It is not a matter of purchasing maintenance
contracts, but of actively nurturing the ecosystem that develops such solutions. In the Italian
example, even when a public administration recognizes the value of supporting the ecosystem,
it often lacks the formal mechanisms to do so. Currently, if an agency relies on a critical library
maintained by a foundation or an individual developer, there is no clear administrative path to
provide financial support without resorting to complex tender procedures that are ill-suited for
this type of partnership.

Consequently, while organizations like PagoPA actively utilize open source software and
maintain public repositories (whether an open source license is used or not), the lack of a
simple contribution framework makes it difficult to effectively "give back" to the community and
support the long term sustainability of the essential building blocks we rely upon.

2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors? Please provide
concrete examples, including the factors (such as cost, risk, lock-in, security, innovation,
among others) that are most important to assess the added value.

The primary value proposition of open source software lies in its ability to foster technological
sovereignty and transparency. By leveraging shared codebases, administrations can focus
resources on customization and service delivery rather than "reinventing the wheel” or pay for
commercial software provided by non European entities.

2 di 6

PagoPA S.p.A.

società per azioni con socio unico

capitale sociale di euro 1,00

0,000 interamente versato

sede legale in Roma, Piazza Colonna 370, CAP 00187

n. di iscrizione a Registro Imprese di Roma, CF e P.IVA 15376371009
However, the realization of this value is intrinsically linked to the sustainability of the
ecosystem. At present, many public infrastructures rely extensively on open source
components without providing reciprocal support, essentially operating as "free riders." This
dynamic poses a systemic risk: if the long term viability of these critical projects is not secured
through active contribution and maintenance, the perceived benefits of digital sovereignty
remain precarious.

From a strategic perspective, the added value of OSS is best demonstrated by its ability to
facilitate rapid and large-scale cooperation. A clear example of this is the successful
deployment of the European Contact Tracing apps/gateway and the EU Digital COVID Certificate
infrastructure. These initiatives proved that when Europe embraces an "open source by design"
approach, it can effectively build a resilient, secure and interoperable digital infrastructure that
earns public trust through transparency.

In summary, the value of open source is not merely a matter of cost-saving. It is a fundamental
pillar for building a secure and innovative digital commons, provided that the transition from
passive consumption to active stewardship with a sustainable business model is fully
addressed.

3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support the
development and growth of the EU open source sector and contribute to the EU’s
technological sovereignty and cybersecurity agenda?

First of all, the EU should create a dedicated “European Sovereign Tech Fund” to overcome the
bureaucratic barriers of direct funding. Taking the German Sovereign Tech Fund as a best practice,
this entity would act as an institutional intermediary. As such, it would collect requirements
from Member States, manage administrative relationships with maintainers and channel
resources directly to the foundations or developers of critical software. By centralizing this
process, the EU can secure its digital supply chain and offer European talent a viable career

3 di 6

PagoPA S.p.A.

società per azioni con socio unico

capitale sociale di euro 1,00

0,000 interamente versato

sede legale in Roma, Piazza Colonna 370, CAP 00187

n. di iscrizione a Registro Imprese di Roma, CF e P.IVA 15376371009
path within public interest infrastructure, preventing the brain drain toward non European
private interests.

In addition to that, we should transition from passive adoption to active governance by
incentivizing the creation of Open Source Programme Offices within national public
administrations and across the European private sector. Building on the European Commission’s
2020-23 Strategy, these offices serve as essential interfaces for legal compliance, security and
community engagement. One way to do so, might be the further empowerment of the
"Network of European OSPOs" to standardize best practices and strategies across the Union.​
​
Furthermore, rethinking public sector procurement could be an opportunity to remove critical
barriers to widen the adoption of open source solutions. According to several studies published
by the European Commission, we should introduce criteria that recognize and reward vendors
with a documented history of upstream contributions, to avoid the “Bus factor” problem (i.e.,
the risk of critical open source projects failing). In this context, PagoPA has undertaken an
economic evaluation process of the open source components used inside its products, precisely
to quantify this risk. As such, our suggestion is to collaboratively evolve this type of analysis -
currently based on a customized Harvard model (Hoffmann & Nagle) developed with the
support of the NEXA center at the Polytechnic University of Turin. Building on this, we invite the
European Commission to promote reporting standards that recognize the value of open source
assets beyond mere accounting capitalization, highlighting the systemic savings and value they
generate for citizens and businesses.

Moreover, it is essential to enforce the "Public Money, Public Code" principle. This guarantees
that software created with public funds becomes part of the digital commons, accessible to the
community as a public good. Evidence produced by major digitalization stakeholders
demonstrates that every euro invested in the development of open source components for
common services (e.g., digital identity, payments, notifications) generates value for the

4 di 6

PagoPA S.p.A.

società per azioni con socio unico

capitale sociale di euro 1,00

0,000 interamente versato

sede legale in Roma, Piazza Colonna 370, CAP 00187

n. di iscrizione a Registro Imprese di Roma, CF e P.IVA 15376371009
ecosystem significantly higher than the initial investment, thanks to the effect of cost
avoidance and the possibility of transnational reuse - ROI of collaboration.

In addition, to foster a resilient Single Digital Market, the EU should support the
professionalization of open source software, bridging the gap between experimental projects
and industrial grade solutions. This involves evolving the current European Open Source Solutions
Catalogue from a mere list of software into a comprehensive transnational enabler. To be
effective, this platform must go beyond code repositories by providing rigorous compliance
verifications against EU regulations (i.e., GDPR, Cyber Resilience Act) and act as a proper
solutions hub with deployment guides and training materials. Crucially, to simplify
procurement, it must offer standardized templates and comparative Cost of Ownership
calculators. As such, by making these resources available in all official languages, we can
ensure that solutions transcend national borders to become shared European assets.​
​
Finally, we invite the European Commission to promote reporting standards that recognize the
value of open source assets beyond mere accounting capitalization, highlighting the systemic
savings they generate for citizens and businesses.

4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why?

Digital Public Infrastructures are a strategic area that should be prioritized as they represent
the backbone of the modern States, but, rather than targeting specific technologies, the EU
should prioritize a methodology for identifying critical infrastructure. We recommend a
data-driven approach based on the following pillars:

      ●​ build upon the logic of the EU FOSSA initiatives, utilizing surveys across Member States
         to identify the software components most critical to public services. Once identified,
         resources should be prioritized for security audits, bug bounties and, most importantly,
         long term maintenance;

5 di 6

PagoPA S.p.A.

società per azioni con socio unico

capitale sociale di euro 1,00

0,000 interamente versato

sede legale in Roma, Piazza Colonna 370, CAP 00187

n. di iscrizione a Registro Imprese di Roma, CF e P.IVA 15376371009
      ●​ establish a common European inventory to get a comprehensive map of open source
         software usage across agencies. This visibility is essential to proactively manage
         vulnerabilities and ensure the resilience of the digital supply chain;
      ●​ support the development of a sovereign company "template" or "shell" to foster
         growth within the private sector. This would provide SMEs with a fully compliant,
         ready-to-use stack of open source components for essential business needs, such as
         internal communication, document collaboration, VPNs and knowledge management.
         By providing a secure and pre-configured infrastructure, maintained with the
         aforementioned legal and funding structures, the EU could help SMEs bypass
         proprietary lock-in from the outset, ensuring they operate within a fully compliant
         European digital framework.

5. In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to increased competitiveness
and cyber resilience?
The public sector is a great candidate for broad open source software adoption, as it directly
translates into transparency for citizens and rationalized public spending. However, there is a
risk that the high cost of compliance introduced by new regulation, such as the CRA, could
paradoxically drive organizations away from open source projects maintained by smaller
communities. In fact, if the administrative burden becomes too high, public and private entities
may retreat toward closed, proprietary solutions or "full in-house" development, effectively
suppressing the collaborative innovation that open source software typically provides.
Consequently, we must ensure that new legislative frameworks are designed to empower
maintainers rather than burdening them with unsustainable liabilities. It is crucial to strike a
balance where increased security requirements do not become an entry barrier for SMEs or a
deterrent for open collaboration. In fact, the ultimate goal of EU regulation should be to
professionalize the open source ecosystem by providing the resources to achieve compliance
and sustainable business models rather than creating legal friction that inadvertently
incentivizes a return to proprietary lock-in.

6 di 6

PagoPA S.p.A.

società per azioni con socio unico

capitale sociale di euro 1,00

0,000 interamente versato

sede legale in Roma, Piazza Colonna 370, CAP 00187

n. di iscrizione a Registro Imprese di Roma, CF e P.IVA 15376371009