Ref. Ares(2026)1118469 - 31/01/2026

                           For "open-source"
(translation from Polish by Bielik https://huggingface.co/LibraxisAI/Bielik-11B-v3.0-mlx-q8)

I am a software developer and IT consultant from Poland. I have been trying to use open-
source solutions and software in my private life and at work for over 20 years.

Below are some observations regarding various areas in which the EU could strengthen its
actions for open-source.

Mobile devices

A smartphone is currently the most common "personal computer". Meanwhile, there are
practically no alternative open operating systems for this type of device. Users are forced
to choose between devices running Android controlled by Google or iOS from Apple.

Google is constantly trying to tighten its control over the supposedly open Android
ecosystem. It systematically limits independent developers' access to the source code of
the system: https://www.androidauthority.com/aosp-source-code-schedule-3630018/.
Independent developers of very niche, alternative versions of Android have an increasingly
difficult task in providing up-to-date versions of their systems or adapting them to new
mobile devices entering the market.

Google is making another attempt to limit independent developers from distributing
applications. Fortunately, the corporation withdrew from its latest idea after massive
criticism from the community: https://www.androidauthority.com/android-developer-
verification-requirements-3590911/. Currently, it is being announced that users will simply
have a more difficult time installing applications distributed outside the "Google Play" store:
https://www.androidauthority.com/google-sideloading-android-high-friction-
process-3633468/. Of course, all of this is for security reasons.

On iOS, independent distribution is just beginning to take off. The legal battle fought by the
European Union with Apple shows how difficult it is to force a global corporation to open up
to competition and allow citizens to choose their app provider after the fact.

Personally, I use an alternative version of Android developed in the EU called "/e/OS"
(https://e.foundation/e-os/). After installing such a version of the system, it turns out that
the mobile apps of some European banks (ING, N26, Revolut) refuse to work on a version
of Android that is not certified by Google (i.e., all alternative versions).

In this way, as a citizen of the EU, I found myself in a situation where European banks or
fin-tech companies require European users to install an operating system (i.e., create an
account and share their data) controlled by a US corporation in order to use their services.
The American corporation Google becomes an unavoidable intermediary between
European banks and their European customers. At the same time, this is not a necessary
condition for such apps to work, as apps of other banks (Millennium, mBank) work without
problems on alternative versions of Android.

Supporting alternative versions of Android not controlled by Google (particularly those
developed in Europe and by European developers) is in the interest of the EU and its
citizens.

Open-source hardware

No chips (CPU, GPU) from the consumer segment are designed on a larger scale in the
EU that would allow users to become independent of non-EU companies (Intel, AMD,
Nvidia, Apple, Qualcomm, Broadcom, etc.).

When buying a new smartphone, laptop, or server, I have no choice: I must buy a device
with chips designed in the US and manufactured in Taiwan or China.

The eProcessor project based on the open RISC-V architecture seems to be a step in the
right direction: https://riscv.org/blog/europe-achieves-a-key-milestone-with-the-europes-
first-out-of-order-risc-v-processor-chip-with-the-eprocessor-project/. However, from the
scarce information it only appears that it will be useful for car production and "embedded
systems". I was unable to find any information on when, in what form, at what price, and
whether it will be available to private users at all.

Meanwhile, Chinese companies also see the potential of the RISC-V architecture and
computers with such processors, allowing work in the Linux system, are already available
for purchase. The strategy of Chinese companies shows the potential of open hardware
solutions and the path that the EU could follow. Perhaps thanks to such projects as
eProcessor, companies such as Fairphone or Raspberry Pi (European but not in the EU)
could become independent of components designed and manufactured outside the EU.
Education

Children in European schools learn to use computers using closed, profit-oriented
Microsoft products: Windows, Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook. Knowledge of these
products is required from them at every stage of their career - regardless of whether it is in
public administration or the private sector. On the other hand, it forces public institutions
and private companies to buy licenses for this software because employees work most
efficiently in a familiar environment. The circle of dependence on closed solutions is
completed.

European users of closed systems, through built-in mechanisms, are increasingly sharing
more and more private data with companies that provide these systems, without any real
possibility of controlling this process: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cj3xjrj7v78o

Using the data obtained in this way, these companies can further hook users on their
additional services, sell the data to marketing companies, train AI models. In short, they
can increase their competitive advantage over European companies.

It would be much better to educate using open-source systems, services, and tools that
are more transparent, predictable, and give much greater control over the user's
processed data. Linux, LibreOffice, alternative web browsers - these are just the most
important examples.

Software in administration

The coziness of large American tech companies with the US government administration
poses an additional threat to the EU.

European administration is currently a hostage of American software and digital service
providers. Many EU public institutions base their IT infrastructure on cloud solutions
provided by American companies: Amazon, Microsoft, Google. Such dependence is an
excellent tool for exerting pressure on European governments and institutions.

A way out of this situation for EU administration seems to be the strategy of implementing
open-source software (e.g., Linux, LibreOffice) and data processing within the
infrastructure provided by European companies (OVH, Hetzner).
For example: After the International Criminal Court (ICC) was cut off from Microsoft's
services https://www.politico.eu/article/microsoft-did-not-cut-services-international-criminal-
court-president-american-sanctions-trump-tech-icc-amazon-google/, the ICC decided to
abandon the company's solutions in favor of open-source software:
https://www.euractiv.com/news/international-criminal-court-to-ditch-microsoft-office-for-
european-open-source-alternative/.

Social media

Public administration in EU countries is increasingly using centralized, mostly American
social media (Facebook, X) as a channel for distributing official information and as a
popular form of contact with citizens, forcing their own citizens to create accounts and
share their data with entities outside the EU. This is clearly a move that makes EU
administration and its citizens dependent on Big Tech companies.

Open-source software and communication standards-based alternatives are ready for use
right now (e.g., Mastodon).