Ref. Ares(2026)1210519 - 03/02/2026

DynFi is a French based company founded in 2001.

Before developing our own Open Source softwares, DynFi has been involved in pfSense,
one of the leading cybersecurity Open Source projects. After Netgate (a US based company)
has taken over pfSense projet in 2014, we have helped OPNsense in the early days of the
project before creating a fork of the project.

Since 2015, DynFi has been a partner of Proxmox and is now a Gold and Training partner of the
project in France.

Our actions are aiming at :
 – evangelising Proxmox technologies to medium and large French companies,
 – providing training actions in French to Sys Admin willing to learn these technologies
    (mostly to French, Belgian, Swiss, Canadian and African countries speaking French),
 – facilitating the buying of Proxmox support in coordination with Proxmox team,
 – help develop technologies tied to Proxmox by contributing to the development or the
    implementation of such technologies within companies

1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector? What are
the main barriers that hamper
(i) adoption and maintenance of high-quality and secure open source; and (ii)
sustainable contributions to open-source communities?

Strength is that we have a market that is willing to adopt Open Source and that there are
many targets where rent-seeking position could be triggered with Open Source
equivalent.

In that regard, Proxmox is to be considered as a major success. They have identified a
rent-seeking position in Server virtualisation technologies, had a long term vision on
how to make money with support and training and moved forward with a bright
implementation of their software. So base on this principle, many different software
industries could be targeted.

Problem is rather at the level of the various government or even core EU organisation
where big GAFAM still have a strong position and the ability to conduct core lobbying
actions - for ex. in France Microsoft has won a 152 M€ tender to provide microsoft 365
to the public education.

From our 25 years of experience in the market the main weakness of Europe is that we
have very few hardware based companies or leading tech companies driving major
innovation, standards, norms which would allow one to build core components at any
level in the value added chain of the Internet.

Let’s take an exemple: the framework DPDK (Data Plane Development Kit) is a set of
open-source libraries and drivers designed to perform high-performance packet
processing in user space, bypassing the Linux kernel network stack.
It is considered by many as a major innovation in the core networking stack, allowing
network drivers to gain speed rarely reached before.

This Open Source project (Hosted under the Linux Foundation) has been founded by :
Intel, Nvidia, Broadcom, Marvell, Huawei, Red Hat, Arm, NXP Semiconductors, Microsoft,
AMD, Ericsson, AT&T, F5, 6WIND.

On core founders we have only two European based companies among which one has
been largely founded by Cisco.

So it means that, the benefits of the implementation of this core Open Source
framework will most certainly be made by the founding members which will be able to
provide direct implementation in hardware which will allow them to maintain their leading
position in the market.

The provided framework is so complex that the "entry fees" in the market are not so
much at the level of the source code, but rather caused by the fact that source code (5
millions lines of code) can’t be apprehended simply.

Major strategic errors have been made in the past by the EU allowing core technology
provider to be bough out with no long term vision of what strategic technologic assets
might be.

2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors? Please
provide concrete examples,
including the factors (such as cost, risk, lock-in, security, innovation, among
others) that are most important to
assess the added value.

If we take the exemple of VMware and Proxmox, it is very simple : today many different
companies are paying licenses to access a technology which can be replaced in 95% of
cases by the equivalent Open Source technology. So the benefits are direct and simple
to assess. This is the reason why so many companies are turning to Proxmox.

With a little review based on license fees, It would be very easy to prioritise core
technologies which shall be prioritised.

The action of the EU shall very rapidly force any newly available techno to provide
bridges to seamlessly shift from one provider to another. Or even better: this shall be at
the core of any service provided to end-users in the EU. And these shift boosters shall
also be compatible with some key open source techno. For databases, cloud services,
housing services, mail services, photo services, …

3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support the
development and growth of the
EU open-source sector and contribute to the EU’s technological sovereignty and
cybersecurity agenda?

The most efficient would be to ease the partnership between large industrial based
companies and smaller software / development companies in the EU.

Plenty of projects could emerge from such actions, because large companies have
difficulties rapidly setting up development teams, and small one have more difficulties
finding customers, but might excel in rapidly being able to set up highly qualified
development teams.

This kind of projects shall also be backed by a strong policy to rapidly regain autonomy
in core hardware technologies (chip manufacturing, hardware based components,
hardware assembly, …). We have provided in our first exemple the main reason why
favouring the emergence of key industrial players is essential. Targeting upcoming
technologies is a must, but being able to provide today’s techno is also essential.

    Dedicated maintenance grants for critical open-source infrastructure to ensure long-term
     security updates.
    Tax credits or subsidies for companies that contribute code or fund development of
     complementary modules.
    Standardised open-source procurement guidelines that recognize 100 % open-source
    solutions without hidden licensing fees.
    EU-wide certification programme for open-source security to build trust in sovereign-
    cloud stacks.
    Training & up-skilling programmes (EU-funded bootcamps) focused on important
    infrastructure software like Proxmox Virtual Environment.
    Prioritise open-source alternatives whenever they are available and demonstrably
    fundable for long-term use – this leverages the inherent cost-efficiency and vendor-
    independence of open-source solutions.
    Legislation and regulation must not discourage small or emerging open-source projects,
     overly restrictive rules push innovators toward non-EU investors, undermining the EU’s
     strategic goal of technological sovereignty. The EU should therefore create a regulatory
     environment that lowers entry barriers for nascent projects while still ensuring security
    and compliance.

4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why?

Priority shall be provided to industries which have the ability to build core components
and move upward in the value chain.

These leading industries shall be backed by software providers to help rapidly fill the
gap.

Leading technos could include: quantum computing, post-quantum encryption, data-
center technologies (thermal efficiency, Open Compute Project, switching technologies,
Open Source BGP based network technologies, …), chip manufacturing technologies,
cybersecurity, … and of course virtualisation technologies offering

    Low total cost of ownership – Proxmox VE, Backup Server and Mail Gateway are 100 %
     open-source and have no hidden licensing fees, allowing organisations to replace
    expensive proprietary stacks with a single, integrated solution.
    No vendor lock-in – Customers can run the software on any hardware and can submit
    patches to add additional functionality that automatically benefits all others.
    High transparency – code can be inspected, audited and improved by anyone.
    Large, active developer community that drives rapid innovation and bug-fixes.

5. In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to increased
competitiveness and cyber resilience?

Public administration
    Low-cost, vendor-neutral virtualization and backup allow ministries to run mission-critical
    services on-premise while keeping full control over data and security updates.

Healthcare
    Secure, isolated virtual machines for electronic health records combined with encrypted
    backups protect patient data and meet GDPR/medical-device regulations. This also eases
    collaboration between medical communities which drives innovation and better healthcare
    for all EU citizens.

Manufacturing & Industry 4.0
    Edge-compute nodes powered by Proxmox VE provide real-time control of production
    lines, the integrated backup server guarantees rapid recovery from ransomware or
    hardware failure.

Telecommunications
    Open-source virtualisation enables telcos to build private 5G or edge-cloud platforms
    without being locked into proprietary hypervisors, improving service agility and reducing
    CAPEX. Securing the telecommunication stack is also very important for any meaningful
    sovereignty ambitions.

Financial services
    Keeping the infrastructure of our financial institutions save and secure should be top
    priority, again having independent and auditable infrastructure in this sector is the basis
    for any meaningful cyber resilience.

Defense & security
    A sovereign, fully auditable stack removes dependence on foreign vendors, supports
    classified workloads in isolated VM’s, and allows rapid patching of vulnerabilities, critical
    for national defence cyber-resilience.

Energy & utilities
    Distributed SCADA and monitoring systems can run on Proxmox VE clusters, benefitting
    from built-in high-availability and disaster-recovery to keep critical infrastructure online
    during attacks or outages.