Ref. Ares(2026)1094093 - 30/01/2026

I am writing in the name of LINBIT HA-Solutions GmbH. LINBIT is an Austrian company that writes and publishes open-
source infrastructure software. The company was established in 2001, so it has been in existence for 25 Years. I
adjusted the business multiple times. Today, we are about 35 FTEs (employees and freelancers) in Austria and about 10
FTEs in the USA.

We mainly sell support services and access to software repositories containing pre-built packages of the open source
software we produce. We create storage virtualization software (“software-defined storage”), primarily for data centers
and corporations (B2B). In that sense, LINBIT is an open-source company, as our revenue stream depends on the
adoption and success of our open-source software.

A major boost to LINBIT’s success was (and is) the uncertainty and disruption created in the virtualization market
following Broadcom's acquisition of VMware. That created a high number of organisations that decided to migrate
away from VMWare (which was like the de facto industry standard). These VMware refugees turn in part to open-source
hypervisors and, with that, to LINBIT for its storage virtualization solution.

The EU cannot create such a global market disruption, but by setting rules for its own data-processing needs, it would
send a strong signal to the European IT sector.

Commercial software corporations (mainly from the US) influence policymakers at all levels through their lobbying
efforts, leveraging deep pockets.

The EU could help by implementing policies for its own data processing to comply with regulations mandating open
source software in support of its digital sovereignty. A law beats a lobbying effort.

I wish the EU would set up guidelines for education. Austria rolled out laptops for schoolchildren. Apart from being
done hastily, it creates all sorts of challenges for parents who need to limit their children's digital media consumption.
Information for parents and enforcement possibilities for limitations are coming years after as an afterthought. But the
point I want to make is that it is a Microsoft monoculture that is presented to our children. Digital sovereignty starts in
education.

The EU should set policies requiring member states to teach their children about the existence of open-source software
and its advantages, as well as the value of digital sovereignty. There are plenty of Laptops on the market with Linux pre-
installed. The Linux Professional Institute has training material ready. Everything is ready, just ignored by the policy
makers in my country. I guess it needs a clear signal from the EU to the member states to get movement in that
direction.
As bullet points:

     • We'd love to see EU guidelines to prioritize open source for EU data processing solutions.
     • We'd love to see clear signals to prioritize open source solutions in education.

PS: I created this document on my Fedora Linux workstation, using LibreOffice. All open source software.

Dipl.-Ing. Philipp Reisner
Geschäftsführer LINBIT HA-Solutions GmbH