Ref. Ares(2026)1223877 - 03/02/2026

              Towards European Open Digital Ecosystems
                European DIGITAL SME Alliance - Call for Evidence

The European DIGITAL SME Alliance, representing over 45,000 tech small and medium
enterprises across Europe, welcomes the efforts in creating a cohesive strategy that supports
the role of open source technologies, especially in an effort to strengthen Europe’s tech
sovereignty. Open source can be, as highlighted by the European Commission DG-DIGIT
Report, a driver to attain digital sovereignty in Europe. However, this approach should be
promoted under the condition that the strategy avoids creating grounds for an exclusive model
rather than a balanced and diversified market of digital solutions made-in-Europe.

Please find below an initial response by DIGITAL SME on the European Open Digital
Ecosystems Strategy. A full response will be published after further consultations with
its members.

Strengths, weaknesses and barriers to open-source adoption
The growth and diffusion of open-source ecosystems can create a positive impact for startups
and SMEs, as it reduces costs and accelerates the development of new products by building
on the foundation of open-source code. OSS can provide the possibility to start innovation
from a safer and more structured code base, allowing European companies to focus on product
diversification and to enhance their market offer. This is particularly beneficial for technology
development in small and medium enterprises, as it would enable them to accelerate the initial
development phase and make more effective use of their internal resources.

At the same time, most EU-produced open-source code seems to be currently exploited by
extra-EU entities, most notably big tech. For instance, those companies often apply a range of

     +32 2893 0235                                       VAT: BE0899786252
     https://digitalsme.eu                               office@digitalsme.eu
     Rue Marie Thérèse 21, 1000 Brussels, Belgium        EU Transparency Reg.: 082698126468-52
business strategies, which consists of first building a product compatible with an open
standard, then layering on proprietary extensions that create incompatibilities, and finally
letting market dominance turn those extensions into the new de facto standard, marginalising
everyone who did not adopt them. Such practices can affect European digital sovereignty and
limit the EU’s influence over its digital infrastructure.

For these reasons, DIGITAL SME supports the efforts to boost European open source, but at
the condition that this does not entail the risk of implicitly hindering the majority of the market
of tech solutions made-in-Europe which European SMEs and startups populate with
proprietary software and services.

Added value of open source
The strategy, if correctly implemented and complemented by targeted measures, with high
priority to be placed on the measures boosting Cloud and AI capacity in the EU, as anticipated
in light of the upcoming Cloud and AI Development Act, could contribute to European tech
sovereignty. It would do so by delivering the following outcomes:

   –    Reduce vendor lock-in. Open-source code, as a public good, prevents dependency on
        single vendors technologies: OSS, for instance, allow European public and private
        customers to switch providers more easily and retain full control over their data and
        systems. This reduces the risk of vendor lock-in, strengthens strategic autonomy, and
        supports the development of a competitive and resilient European homegrown
        ecosystem.
   –    Improve suppliers’ diversification. Boosting the diffusion of open-source products is
        one option to promote better diversification of suppliers, keeping in mind that the issue
        of control and development of the technology in the EU remains the most critical aspect
        to ensure the sovereignty of a digital solution.

     +32 2893 0235                                          VAT: BE0899786252
     https://digitalsme.eu                                  office@digitalsme.eu
     Rue Marie Thérèse 21, 1000 Brussels, Belgium           EU Transparency Reg.: 082698126468-52
Concrete actions and priority areas
Ensure fair market competition. Policies supporting open source do not erase the market
challenges that European companies face, such as the network effects and market dominance
exercised by big companies, and high coordination and administrative costs. The Open Digital
Ecosystems Strategy should level the playing field and provide for a robust policy framework,
and structured financing and investments ecosystems, so that also SME-led initiatives can
succeed in scaling up.

Focus on long-term maintenance. The strategy should not limit financing and support for
developers to the early stages, as the main bottlenecks for SMEs in open source lie in long-
term code maintenance, governance costs, and security updates. Without support during
scaling and the medium to long-term, the ability of SMEs to expand and commercialise their
products would be significantly constrained.

Combine the Open Digital Ecosystems Strategy with targeted interoperability measures.
To ensure that coding systems can work seamlessly together, the open-source strategy should
be complemented by coherent and targeted industrial policy measures, which together can
effectively promote better interoperability. This is particularly relevant in critical sectors such
as artificial intelligence and cloud computing, where long-term interoperability and data
portability are essential to maintain efficiency of products while ensuring an open and
competitive market.

Guarantee high cybersecurity standards. Open source can enhance transparency,
auditability and resilience, while enabling SMEs to build and scale solutions on shared and
trusted components. EU action should focus on the sustainability and security of open-source
software across its entire lifecycle, in line with the CRA and NIS2.

Areas of application. Priority should be given to tech areas that are both strategic for
European tech sovereignty and close to market needs, such as AI, cybersecurity tools, software

     +32 2893 0235                                        VAT: BE0899786252
     https://digitalsme.eu                                office@digitalsme.eu
     Rue Marie Thérèse 21, 1000 Brussels, Belgium         EU Transparency Reg.: 082698126468-52
device frameworks, cloud and edge services, digital identity and trust technologies, and IoT
software.

    -      Artificial intelligence: open source is critical because AI development relies heavily on
           large, shared datasets. European SMEs often lack the resources to develop proprietary
           AI models from scratch. By leveraging open-source AI, they could implement advanced
           machine learning solutions faster and reduce costs.
    -      Digital public infrastructure. Open source can have a key role to promote
           interoperability and more transparency, essential because many public contracts and
           cross-border services require integration with standardized platforms, for instance e-
           government services, digital identity and sensitive data exchange infrastructures. Using
           open-source solutions could allow European operators to reduce dependence on non-
           European systems, which can be costly and produce lock-in effects.

Conclusion
European DIGITAL SME Alliance supports the Commission’s initiative to create a cohesive
strategy for European Open Digital Ecosystems, at the condition that this does not become
exclusive of portions of the existing market. DIGITAL SME supports the boost of made-in-
Europe solutions in AI, digital public infrastructure and all the critical tech layers that are key
to attain tech sovereignty, including via open-source solutions, to reduce vendor lock-in and
foster better interoperability.

DIGITAL SME particularly looks forward the publication of the Tech Sovereignty Package, and
in particular the Cloud and AI Development Act, its core pillar, as a crucial opportunity to cut
the dependency on extra-EU hyperscalers and boost European homegrown alternative
solutions.

        +32 2893 0235                                       VAT: BE0899786252
        https://digitalsme.eu                               office@digitalsme.eu
        Rue Marie Thérèse 21, 1000 Brussels, Belgium        EU Transparency Reg.: 082698126468-52