Ref. Ares(2026)1148378 - 02/02/2026
Stichting OSI Europe Foundation​
Janvossensteeg 39
2312WC Leiden, Netherlands
Transparency Register N° 5258685100414-30​

                                                                                    ​

                                                                       12 January 2026

Dear Commission Reviewer,

On behalf of OSI Europe Foundation and the Open Source Initiative, we’d like to
thank you for this opportunity to provide feedback on the European Open Digital
Ecosystem Strategy. The Open Source Initiative (OSI) is a global charity at the heart
of the Open Source Community for over 25 years, recognized globally as the
authority defining Open Source. OSI Europe Foundation is its independent European
chapter.

The Open Digital Ecosystem Strategy comes at a pivotal time for Europe. As
geopolitical instability intensifies, we concur with the Commission’s view that digital
sovereignty is a crucial goal. This involves Europe building and deploying
competitors to the solutions on which it currently depends. We believe that Open
Source Software (from herein FOSS) is the best way to achieve that goal.

By embracing FOSS as a means to achieve this goal, Europe can compete with
dominant technology players at a fraction of the cost, harnessing expertise from
around the world to drive competitiveness, security and economic growth, while
retaining digital sovereignty. With Europe contributing nearly 20% of global Open
Source development, and EU developers being the largest group of contributors to
Open Source on Github1, the ecosystem represents Europe’s Silicon Valley—a
dynamic, decentralized hub of expertise and collaboration.

This response contains a selection of proposals to achieve that goal. Including both
non-legislative proposals the Commission can undertake to achieve that goal, as well
as opportunistic changes that can be made to laws that are currently under revision.

1
    https://innovationgraph.github.com/economies/eu

                                                 1
Detailed Response to Commission questions

1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector?
What are the main barriers that hamper adoption and maintenance of
high-quality and secure open source; and sustainable contributions to
open-source communities?

Open Source is not so much a sector as it is an ecosystem made up of
Companies2, Communities and Charities3, foundations4, OSPO5s, and a plethora of
individual developers working both on projects based inside the EU, and on projects
based outside the EU. These collectively form a symbiotic relationship that drives
Open Source development forward: individuals, communities, companies and OSPOs
reuse each-others code, contribute to each-others projects, and collaborate to build
solutions together.

It’s also important to differentiate between Open Source products (such as CRMs,
Operating Systems, Collaboration and Communication Platforms) and Open Source
components (Programming Languages, Libraries). All Open Source products (and
many proprietary products), depend on Open Source components. While such
components are not end products, without them, the ecosystem could not succeed.

Hence, to guarantee the success of the ecosystem as a whole, it is important to
explore the strengths, weaknesses, & challenges facing the different actors in
the Open Source ecosystem, and the different types of projects which exist
within it.

2
  For example, NextCloud, SUSE, Element, OpenNebula, Odoo, Plausible Analytics, Elastic
3
  For example, Framasoft, KDE e.v, Mastodon, OpenCollective Europe etc..
4
  Such as the Eclipse Foundation, who host many Open Source projects
5
  Open Source Programme Offices, organisations within companies and public administrations
devoted to Open Source

                                                                                             2
Commercial Open Source

Europe’s Commercial Open Source (COSS)6 sector is a global leader, ranking
second7 only to the United States. It thrives by offering end-user and B2B products,
monetized through models like Software-as-a-Service8, technical support, dual
licensing, and Open Core9. The sector is growing, driven by public sector adoption
(governments, cities, and universities) and rising private sector interest.

Despite this, COSS startups in Europe face challenges in securing capital and
funding, much like their proprietary counterparts. While this slows expansion,
European COSS companies have leveraged Open Source to develop competitive
solutions at a fraction of the cost of dominant technology players, and governments
across the EU are already beginning to deploy these solutions.

Getting organisations to switch is challenging, with prospective customers often
locked into proprietary ecosystems, and ICT department hesitancy due to
unfamiliarity with FOSS solutions. Even at DG DIGIT, despite high staff proficiency
with FOSS and successful trials, management is hesitant to deploy FOSS
solutions, even when reliance on proprietary dominant tech players from abroad is
a growing & proven risk. Addressing these concerns is difficult, as COSS
companies don’t have as much to spend on advertising and customer acquisition,
instead relying on organic approaches, such as word-of-mouth.

Another challenge arises from government-backed projects bundling community
editions of COSS into enterprise packages. While beneficial for the public, this risks
undermining the revenue streams of the original open-source companies. For these
government projects to remain sustainable in the long term, it’s crucial to adopt
models that preserve the financial viability of the companies developing the
underlying software.
6
   By "COSS" we mean a particular category of open source software used to directly generate revenue.
All software under OSI approved licenses may be used commercially, as was established in 2006 by
David Wheeler
7
  : Sam Boysel, Matthieu Lavergne, Matt Trifiro, “The State of Commercial Open Source 2025: The
Data-Backed Financial Case from 25 Years of Commercial Open Source,”, The Linux Foundation, 08/25
8
   In this model, companies offer their software as a service for a monthly fee, with maintenance and
operations managed by them.
9
   In this model, core functionality is Open Source while certain features are paid & proprietary.

                                                                                                   3
Open Source non-profits: communities, charities, and foundations

Many participants in the Open Source ecosystem are non-profits, especially
those developing Open Source components—critical building blocks for both
proprietary and Open Source software. Studies show over 90% of commercial
software10 contains Open Source components11, with 70% of code in commercial
software codebases being Open Source. They are the raw materials of software.

However, monetizing these components is difficult because unlike raw materials
in the real world, they can be reproduced infinitely at no cost. While some larger
foundations are financially stable, others struggle to maintain their projects when
they become unexpectedly essential to others. Most companies using these
components neither contribute code nor provide funding. This unsustainable
situation risks creating future security threats.

The Cyber Resilience Act (CRA) could help address this by allowing non-profits to
charge modest fees for security attestations, reducing compliance burdens for
manufacturers and creating a sustainable funding mechanism to support the
maintenance of critical Open Source components that help Europe compete with the
US in both Open Source and proprietary software.

Additionally, The CRA creates Open Source Software Stewards: legal entities that
support the development of a FOSS project. But as of now, many projects don’t
have a legal entity in the EU (even those based in Europe). In parallel, some
existing US-based projects are considering moving some or all of their operations to
the EU. Reducing the barrier to entry for future stewards is critical to the success of
the CRA, and will result in more projects making a home in Europe, helping to attract
talent and create economic value in the EU, while protecting Open Source projects
we rely on from coercion, protecting EU sovereignty.

Finally, some Open Source projects, such as European social network Mastodon,
operate as a non-profit due to their public benefit goals. They are often of societal
and strategic value to Europe, hence we recommend the Commission recognises this
value and ensures expanded funding opportunities for such projects.

10
     both Open Source and proprietary
11
     www.blackduck.com/resources/analyst-reports/open-source-security-risk-analysis.html

                                                                                           4
Individual Open Source Developers: Europe’s hidden Silicon Valley

The final set of participants in the FOSS ecosystem are its individual developers. They
are either building Open Source products or components alone, or contributing to
existing projects. They are Europe’s hidden silicon valley: an extraordinary but
hidden pool of expertise spread across the Union.

Without them, many of the world's most successful Open Source projects wouldn’t
exist: Linux, which powers the majority of devices and services we use today, was
created by a Finn: Linus Torvalds; and you’d struggle to find an internet-connected
device today that doesn’t have a copy of the CURL library, a tool used for transferring
information over the internet written by the Swede, Daniel Stenberg.

This isn’t by mere chance: Europe is a world leader in Open Source contributors
and contributions: it makes up around 20% of global Open Source contributions12,
and all 27 EU member states are in the top 50 countries by Open Source developers
per capita, with 12 in the top 20.

Several elements can explain this: notably Europe’s strong rankings in work-life
balance13, which has been found to be a factor in sustainable Open Source
contributions14, but also the willingness of many European Companies to employ
full-time Open Source contributors15. These conditions also help create European
technical expertise, improving Europe’s competitiveness. Europe should hence take
actions that foster these elements such as maintaining citizens' work-life balance,
developing tax or procurement incentives for companies which contribute to OSS
projects, and expanding citizens' Opportunities to contribute.

12
   Johannes Wachs, Mariusz Nitecki, William Schueller, Axel Polleres, The Geography of Open Source
Software: Evidence from GitHub, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, Volume 176, 2022,
13
   Hideo Noda, 2020. "Work–Life Balance and Life Satisfaction in OECD Countries: A Cross-Sectional
Analysis," Journal of Happiness Studies, Springer, vol. 21(4), pages 1325-1348
14
   Linåker, Johan & Link, Georg & Lumbard, Kevin. (2024). Sustaining Maintenance Labor for Healthy
Open Source Software Projects through Human Infrastructure: A Maintainer Perspective.
10.48550/arXiv.2408.06723.
Johannes Wachs, Mariusz Nitecki, William Schueller, Axel Polleres, The Geography of Open Source
Software: Evidence from GitHub, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, Volume 176, 2022
15
   Cailean Osborne and Adrienn Lawson, “Open Source as Europe’s Strategic Advantage: Trends,
Barriers, and Priorities for the European Open Source Community amid Regulatory and Geopolitical
Shifts”, foreword by Cédric Gégout, The Linux Foundation, August 2025.

                                                                                                     5
Challenges to all Open Source participants

Regulation is also a significant challenge for all actors in the Open Source
ecosystem, because of the symbiotic nature of the Open Source ecosystem: a law
that impacts one type of Open Source entity, will inevitably have repercussions for
the others.

In recent years, the EU has increasingly considered the impact of its laws on FOSS,
and while the mitigations it initially proposed (for example with the Cyber Resilience
Act) needed tweaking, the fact that Open Source was a consideration is already
something to be praised.

However, the symbiotic nature of the ecosystem means it is very difficult to predict
the impact of legislation on the Open Source ecosystem. Better connections with
Open Source communities are key to ensure future regulation doesn’t inadvertently
negatively impact Open Source.

Finally, patent-encumbered standards are another barrier to development and
adoption. By nature, FOSS cannot include patent-encumbered components. When
vital European standards are encumbered by patents, it prevents fair competition
from Open Source in that space.

In addition to this, the current European Standards system is not adequately
welcoming to Open Source, making participation in the system itself extremely
challenging, in particular for non-profit organisations.

In our answer to question 2 we propose a selection of solutions to these issues. For
further information beyond those, you can also see our feedback on the 1025
(Standardisation regulation) revision.

                                                                                         6
2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors?
Please provide concrete examples, including the factors (such as cost, risk,
lock-in, security, innovation, among others) that are most important to
assess the added value.

Digital Independence & Sovereignty

Geopolitical tensions make it crucial for Europe to control its technological
infrastructure. Currently, Europe relies on foreign firms for most software
solutions—solutions that cannot be reliably audited, may contain “kill switches” or
“backdoors,” and could be weaponised against European authorities and businesses.

Test Case: the International Criminal Court

Several International Criminal Court judges have lost access to their email accounts16 after
being sanctioned by the United States, as technology companies based in the US can no
longer provide services to them. This led the ICC to move away from services offered by
US-based companies. Recently a former EU official was also sanctioned by the US.

FOSS offers an alternative. Unlike proprietary solutions, it enables trust and
interoperability by allowing users to use, study, modify, and share the code. This
transparency lets anyone review how the software works, verify its security, and
develop compatible services or derivatives if needed.

Test Case: Police radios vs Element

Upon its release, many European Countries adopted the proprietary TETRA standard for
radio communication in Emergency Services & Military. The encryption algorithms used in
TETRA were proprietary, and could not be audited by the government. 25 years later,
researchers discovered the encryption algorithm was deliberately flawed, allowing
intercepts.

Today, more and more governments are adopting the Open Source solution Element for their
communications. Because Element is Open Source, the code of all its components - including
encryption algorithms - can be audited by governments to guarantee they are safe and
secure.

16
  https://www.lbc.co.uk/article/british-icc-chief-prosecutor-lost-email-bank-accounts-frozen-trump-san
ctions-rpTkm_2/

                                                                                                    7
With Open Source, Europe can maintain digital sovereignty, benefiting from
global expertise while retaining control, regardless of where the software
originates. Additionally, users can choose to run that code anywhere, with or without
developer approval and support, be it on premises, on the developers cloud, or a
cloud of their choice.

Test Case: Confluence to XWiki in the European Parliament

The European Parliament previously used Atlassian’s proprietary workspace software,
Confluence, which could be self-hosted or accessed via Atlassian’s cloud. In 2021, Atlassian
discontinued the self-hosted option, leaving Parliament with two choices: migrate
confidential data to Atlassian’s infrastructure (potentially outside the EU) or switch to an
alternative. In 2025, Parliament opted to migrate to XWiki, a french Open Source solution
supported by an eponymous company. They signed a contract with that company to
organise the migration.

This migration gave Parliament flexibility: they could continue to host their data on their own
infrastructure, use XWiki’s, or choose any other cloud provider. As open-source software,
XWiki also allowed Parliament to audit the code for security threats, and, if needed, create a
custom derivative version to avoid unwanted future changes. Open Source gave parliament
back control of its digital infrastructure.

Competitiveness and value for money

Open Source can also benefit Europe’s competitiveness, and bring down costs for
businesses and public authorities alike.

In procurement, Open Source keeps costs down and suppliers competitive:
when suppliers offer a service based on FOSS, they cannot rely on vendor lock-in or
the inconvenience and cost of migration to retain contracts17: because the software
is Open Source, the user can move to another supplier of the same software, or even
bring the software in house. This forces suppliers to stay price-competitive.

17
  Simon, Kimberly D. "The value of open standards and open-source software in government
environments." IBM Systems Journal 44.2 (2005): 227-238.

                                                                                               8
Test Case: Productivity123 vs Nextcloud

Productivity123 is a fictional proprietary collaboration and office suite used by the European
Commission, at a cost of €15/user/month. The contract is expiring, and the Commission has
launched a tender.

In the meantime, Productivity123’s developer built BackseatDriver, an AI assistant for
Productivity123, which proved expensive and unpopular with users. To recoup costs, they
integrate BackseatDriver into Productivity123, and bump the cost to €23/user/month. Because
the software is proprietary, and they are the only provider, the Commission can either
accept the price hike, or undergo an extremely expensive and disruptive transition to
another office suite.

The Commission decides to make the move to NextCloud, an Open Source collaboration and
office suite, and choose NextCloud GmbH, the developer of NextCloud, to provide the
service. The move is difficult but successful. Five years later, when the contract comes up for
renewal, the Commission launches another tender, attracting several competing
Nextcloud providers, this guarantees that the tender remains competitive.

In software development, Open Source also allows European Businesses to
build new products faster: because they can re-use existing Open Source code to
save reinventing the wheel. As of now, around 70% of code in commercial code bases is
Open Source, even for proprietary software products.

Accounting for the savings it enables, a recent Harvard18 study estimated Open
Source’s value at $9tn. Recent European Commission research19 estimates that over
the course of 1 year, a €1 billion investment in Open Source in Europe resulted in
between €65 and €95 billion of benefit for the European Economy.

The same analysis estimates that an increase of 10% of FOSS contributions would
annually generate an additional 0.4% to 0.6% GDP as well as more than 600
additional ICT start-ups in the EU.

18
   Hoffmann, Manuel, Frank Nagle, and Yanuo Zhou. "The Value of Open Source Software." Harvard
Business School Working Paper, No. 24-038, January 2024.
19
   Blind, K., Böhm, M., Grzegorzewska, P., Katz, A., Muto, S., Pätsch, S., & Schubert, T. (2021). The
impact of Open Source Software and Hardware on technological independence, competitiveness and
innovation in the EU economy. Final Study Report. European Commission, Brussels, doi, 10, 430161.

                                                                                                    9
In short, like Infrastructure in the real world, Open Source creates opportunities
for businesses to thrive and drives our economies forwards.

Societal benefit

When governments procure or develop Open Source solutions, those solutions
benefit everyone: Since everyone can make use of the created software, the
economic benefits are multiplied: a software solution developed for the public sector
can be reused or even commercialised by the private sector, creating cost savings for
businesses, and spurring economic growth at no additional cost.

Test Case: Prozorro

In 2014, the Ukrainian government recognized the potential of an activist-developed
software project designed to combat corruption in procurement through radical
transparency. With government funding, the project evolved into Prozorro20, an
award-winning public procurement hub. As open-source software, Prozorro earned public
trust and enabled interoperability, allowing third-party access to procurement data for
transparency.

Because Prozorro was Open Source, Ukrainian companies were also able to use it as the
basis for a Commercial product, RIALTO, which is designed to enable transparent
business-to-business procurement. Finally, governments of some EU countries are now
considering deploying Prozorro, or building their systems using Prozorro as a basis, bringing
down development costs and potentially enabling interoperability between procurement
systems.

Procuring Open Source can contribute to high quality jobs that strengthen
Europe’s digital independence: when proprietary software is procured, especially
from outside of the EU, the jobs created within the EU will mainly be sales and
technical support instead of development. However, procuring Open Source
solutions in Europe, regardless of the origin of the project, can result in the creation
of skilled jobs in software development, bolstering European technological expertise
and strengthening Europe’s digital independence. Additionally, Procuring Open
Source software and services from suppliers within the EU means the money
stays in the Union, regardless of where the Open Source project comes from.

20
     https://oecd-opsi.org/innovations/eprocurement-system-prozorro/

                                                                                           10
3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support
the development and growth of the EU open-source sector and contribute to
the EU’s technological sovereignty and cybersecurity agenda?

Procurement & Development of IT solutions

Each year, the EU and its member states spend about €125 billion on ICT services.
Much of this spending flows to non-EU companies, failing to support the EU’s
economic or strategic objectives: we may be funding the solutions, but we are
still buying the problems.

Reforming public procurement to reduce barriers for Open Source and
recognize its benefits would be one of the EU’s most impactful decisions for
digital sovereignty and the success of Open Source. We aren’t seeking special
treatment; Open Source is already competitive. If its advantages were fully
considered in procurement, we believe it would outperform proprietary alternatives.

Proposed Measures:

☑ Prohibit tenders from requiring specific proprietary solutions or proprietary
or patent-encumbered standards

☑ Consider interoperability, reusability, vendor lock-in, digital sovereignty,
and total cost of ownership as procurement criteria

☑ Ensure procurement templates are designed with Open Source in mind.

☑ Consider code and financial contributions by the supplier to Open Source
components they depend on as a procurement criteria.

You can find a more detailed paper on proposed solutions in our feedback to the call
for evidence on a revision of the public procurement directive.

In addition, to maximize the benefit of IT investments, we recommend the
Commission adopt an “Open by Default” policy when building new solutions
internally, or procuring custom-built solutions externally, requiring the code to
be stored in a public commission-hosted repository, and encouraging member states
to adopt similar policies, in line with the Public Money - Public Code principle.

                                                                                    11
Funding

The Open Source Initiative and OSI Europe Foundation have also been major
supporters of the Next Generation Internet initiative, and other EU-funded grants to
Open Source projects which have achieved excellent value-for-money, and enjoy
wide popularity in Open Source communities. To ensure the sustainability of Open
Source, and spur future innovation in Europe, we propose the following:

Proposed Measures:

☑ Create a European Sovereign Tech Fund, partially modeled on the German STF,
as a replacement for the Next Generation Initiative

The fund should support: Open Source components and projects critical to European
users, businesses and Open Source communities, promising early-stage Open
Source innovations, and Open Source projects of strategic value to the EU. A
dedicated sub-fund could also accelerate the development of specific features in
Open Source projects (including commercial ones) used by the EU and its member
states, further strengthening Europe’s digital sovereignty.

☑ Include Open Sourcing deliverables as a criteria in Horizon grants where
software is a deliverable

☑ Create a one-stop-shop for funding opportunities relating to Open Source

☑ Develop Open Source Attestations under the Cyber Resilience Act, ensuring
they can become a source of revenue for Open Source Stewards.

Regulation

Regulation remains a major challenge for the Open Source ecosystem, often forcing
communities to divert significant resources to address issues proposals after they’re
published. To support the EU in regulating with Open Source in mind, we propose
the following:

                                                                                   12
Proposed Measure:

☑ Create an Open Source Expert Group leveraging expertise of Open Source
organisations in Brussels and beyond, representing Open Source Companies,
Foundations, Communities, and individual developers.

☑ Avoid imposing “Know your contributor” requirements A core benefits of
Open Source is that you can use it without having to trust the developer. Requiring
contributors to formally identify themselves will dramatically cut participation, in
particular by minorities, with no impactful security benefit, as the state actors behind
such attacks have the resources to get around such requirements. The best way to
prevent this is through funding to strengthen sustainability of Open Source and
ensure contributions are adequately reviewed.

Standards

The European Standard system also poses some fundamental challenges for Open
Source: in many cases standards are paywalled or patent-encumbered, meaning
it is not possible for Open Source projects to consider those standards21.
Additionally, Open Source is inadequately represented in the standardisation
process like other representatives of the fourth sector22, meaning standards aren’t
made with Open Source in mind. This has been a particularly severe issue in the CRA.

Proposed Measures:

☑ Mandate that all European Standardisation Organisations have an
additional rights-waived mode where no further relationships are necessary to
either access or implement the standard.

☑ Empower the Commission to designate publicly available Open
specifications as European Standards when they are not patent encumbered.

☑ Consider means by which the Open Source ecosystem can be represented
and financially supported, akin to the current Regulation 1025 Annex III system.

21

https://opensource.org/blog/osi-to-the-european-commission-make-space-for-patent-free-standards-t
oo
22
   https://opensource.org/blog/modern-eu-policies-need-the-voices-of-the-fourth-sector

                                                                                              13
For more information see our feedback on the Standardisation Regulation revision.

Knowledge and Skills

To unlock Open Source’s potential, it is vital that both citizens and public authorities
build the knowledge and skills to best make use of it. Open Source is often at the
heart of the experiences of self-taught programmers, who regularly use Open Source
components, and whose first projects are often Open Source. However this is not
always reflected in current education and reskilling programmes.

Furthermore, some existing European Open Source developers are considering
trying to find ways to commercialise their projects, but don’t know where to start.

Finally, public authorities mindful of the EU’s strategic goals around digital
sovereignty and data protection are keen to deploy Open Source solutions, but often
lack the confidence to do so, either due to a perceived lack of expertise on their side,
or a lack of knowledge of existing deployments of Open Source solutions.

To address these issues we propose the following measures:

Proposed Measures:

☑ Integrate Open Source into education and reskilling around technology to
build a generation of European developers who know how to benefit from Open
Source.

☑ Provide support to European Open Source developers who want to
Commercialise their projects, with advice on pathways to commercialisation from
existing experts and companies.

☑ Support local authorities in knowledge-sharing and knowledge building
around the deployment of Open Source, through workshops, testimonials, and
community-building, in particular for regional and municipal authorities.

                                                                                       14
Business & Economy

Finally, there are a selection of measures the EU could take to economically
incentivise Open Source, and support the development of Open Source companies
and alternatives, beyond a Sovereign Tech Fund.

Proposed Measures:

☑ Create an incentive in the procurement system for companies to dedicate
time to contributing to Open Source projects, in particular the Open Source
components that the company depends on for its products.

☑ Provide guidance to member states tax authorities, to allow Open Source
contributions by companies to be tax-deductible as Research & Development.

☑ Provide guidance to member states tax authorities, to ensure that Open
Source Software Stewards can sell Security attestations under the CRA to fund the
sustainable development of Open Source components.

☑ Support fledgling Open Source companies by offering training and guidance on
going from an Open Source project to an Open Source company, and by offering
funding or other incentives.

☑ Make it easier for Open Source foundations to get established in Europe by
delivering the Directive on European cross-border associations, including a status for
public-benefit foundations in the upcoming 28th regime, or providing a tool that
compares EU member states’ various non-profit statuses, and generates legal
statutes on the basis of templates, with an english translation.

Other Measures
Proposed Measures:

☑ Use OpenDocument formats by default in EU Institutions: the existing
Microsoft Office suite used in the institutions supports saving documents using
OpenDocument formats23 by default. Doing so makes those documents more
interoperable, and facilitates future switches to alternative office solutions.

23
     https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenDocument

                                                                                    15
4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why?

Here, the OSI and OSI Europe Foundation do not have specific recommendations,
however, in order to achieve digital sovereignty, we would urge the Commission
to first and foremost address areas with the highest present dependency on
proprietary software from outside the European Union. This includes Operating
Systems, Office and Collaboration Platforms, Email and Calendar, identity
management systems, and Social Media platforms.

5. In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to increased
competitiveness and cyber resilience?

The use of Open Source is already increasing competitiveness and cyber resilience
across the economy, in particular when it comes to Open Source Components. An
increase in deployments of Open Source Products could also drastically improve
cyber resilience at a time of geopolitical tensions, while bringing down costs and
strengthening competitiveness.

We hope that these answers have provided useful insights about how Europe can
better support and benefit from Open Source. Please do not hesitate to reach out to
us if you have any questions. Our dedicated policy staff in Brussels would also be
delighted to meet for an in person meeting at a time of your convenience.

Best Regards,

                                              Jordan Maris - jordan@opensource.org​
                                                EU Policy Officer, OSI Europe Foundation​
                                                 EU Policy Analyst, Open Source Initiative

                                                                                       16