Ref. Ares(2026)1166815 - 02/02/2026

             Ares(2026)69111 – Call for Evidence
             Vodafone’s response to the European Commission’s call for
             evidence on a European Open Digital Ecosystem Strategy

C2 General
             Introduction
             Vodafone welcomes the opportunity to comment on the European Commission’s planned
             Communication Towards European open digital ecosystems. Vodafone Group currently uses
             open-source software for some of its operations in Europe. For example, it deploys Ultra Hub 7
             Routers using the RDK-B open-source software in Germany and recently chose Wind River Cloud
             Platform as the containers-as-a-service (CaaS) layer for its Open RAN deployments. Vodafone is
             also a member of the O-Ran Alliance, which supports the creation of open-source software for
             the Radio Access Network (RAN), in collaboration with the Linux Foundation.
             Our consultation response focuses predominantly on commercially available and distributed
             open-source software, as we understand this to be the key focus of the Commission’s upcoming
             strategy. They present a different set of advantages and challenges than free and available
             ‘community’ open source directly integrated by companies. However, we still wish to address
             important challenges related to free and open-source software, namely cybersecurity.
             Use of open source based products improves vendor diversity and can contribute to European
             digital sovereignty in multiple ways. For most public sector and sovereignty sensitive
             organisations this means commercially provided services based on open source. CIOs need a way
             to evaluate the sovereignty benefits of open source-based solutions. European sovereignty and
             European competitiveness will both benefit from a stronger European open-source sector. We
             support targeted incentives to grow this sector but grants etc. should be linked to products which
             offer greater sovereignty benefits (e.g. minimise proprietary interfaces) Above all we are cautious
             about introducing an open-source preference in public procurement which could push public
             sector organisation to use open source before the ecosystem (both users and vendors) is mature
             enough.
             Summary of Vodafone’s recommendations

                ➢ Ensure a consistent EU wide legal definition of open source
                  The EU should harmonise the differing definitions of open source found across the AI
                  Act, Cyber Resilience Act, and Interoperable Europe Act, aligning them with
                  internationally recognised principles (e.g. UN Open Source Principles) while accounting
                  for the specificities of different technologies.
                ➢ Create a clear, standardised framework for assessing the sovereignty value of open
                  source solutions
                  The Communication should define which sovereignty components matter most (e.g.
                  interoperability, availability of EU based technical support, hardware dependencies) and

C2 General
                    how they vary across technologies like cloud and AI. This gives CIOs confidence when
                    evaluating opensource options.
                ➢   Ensure strong cybersecurity assurance for open source technologies
                    The EU should address concerns relating to vulnerabilities, supply chain risks, and data
                    protection; encourage compliance with the Cyber Resilience Act, GDPR, and AI Act; and
                    support the development and uptake of open standards to improve interoperability.
                ➢   Recognise the global nature of open source and the value of international
                    collaboration
                    Open source is inherently transnational, and attempts to achieve full technological
                    sovereignty by limiting external input would undermine innovation. Initiatives such as
                    the Digital Commons EDIC show the benefits of collaborative models.
                ➢   Avoid assuming that open source is inherently safer or more sovereign
                    Open source first mandates in public procurement should not be introduced without
                    proper risk assessment. Many projects rely heavily on non European contributors, and
                    premature prioritisation may replicate dependencies. Adoption should be gradual and
                    maturity based.
                ➢   Provide targeted funding and invest in European skills development
                    Funding should prioritise open source projects that clearly support agreed sovereignty
                    objectives and comply with EU legislation. Strengthening the European skills base is also
                    essential to reduce reliance on non-EU expertise.
                ➢   Avoid over-privileging open source at the expense of long-standing European actors
                    Open source solutions should not receive disproportionate advantages in procurement
                    or funding when established European companies have consistently contributed to EU
                    autonomy and resilience.

             Open source in the context of European sovereignty
             Vodafone supports Europe’s ambition to increase its strategic autonomy in an open manner and
             competitiveness in the digital sphere, which the upcoming Communication seeks to address
             alongside the Cloud and AI Development Act, Chips Act, Industrial Accelerator Act and more. We
             recognise that the integration of commercially distributed open-source present some advantages
             in this regard, in particular when it comes to reducing dependencies on foreign providers:
                ➢ Available source code increases transparency, auditability, and verifiability in comparison
                  to proprietary software. In that sense, open source models can provide users with clearer
                  visibility over the provenance and decision-making process of the software.
                ➢ Open source is also considered more scalable and interoperable than proprietary systems,
                  including through the use of open standards and enabling customization to adapt to
                  different business needs.
                ➢ Open source can be cost-saving for companies by avoiding potentially high licensing,
                  switching, and usage-based fees that come with proprietary software contracts. As such,
                  it can prevent vendor-lock in, which the European Union has sought to address in existing

C2 General
                    legislation including the EU Data Act and the Digital Market’s Act, and will continue to
                    focus on as part of the Cloud & AI Development Act.

             European digital sovereignty also means being competitive on the global stage and staying at the
             forefront of innovation. Investing in the EU’s open source ecosystem is an important aspect of
             the digital sovereignty agenda given the growing market for these solutions. While the open
             source model can provide some advantages technologically and partially reduce reliance on third
             countries, Vodafone notes a number of important challenges with promoting the open source
             ecosystem, as it currently stands, as a true sovereign solution:
                ➢ First, the essence of open source - and to an extent its very strength - is global cooperation.
                  Collective input in the code and maintenance of the software is the foundation of these
                  projects, and they extensively rely on global maintainers to fix, review, and improve the
                  code. Large-scale open-source projects require financial and technical backing, and today
                  these are often from non-European commercial entities.
                ➢ There is less visibility on the applicability of EU law upstream and the influence, even
                  indirect, that these companies can have on the project and its development.
                  Transparency in project governance and decision-making processes is a key component
                  of user control. As pointed out in the call for evidence, it also means that most of the
                  monetary value of these projects often flows outside of Europe.
                ➢ When integrated, created, and maintained directly into by companies or public sector
                  administrations, these solutions can allow for better control of the evolution of the
                  software and correction of any potential bugs, and data sovereignty. These solutions have
                  the potential to exist at scale, but in reality these are limited at present (for practicality
                  reasons, benefits of commercial assistance, lack of available infrastructure) and users
                  tend to rely on commercial entities, which as highlighted, are often non-European.

             Vodafone’s recommendations
             Vodafone is concerned that open source should not be overemphasized as a readily-available
             sovereign solution. Specifically, we are more cautious than the call for evidence when it comes
             to open source ensuring that the EU digital ecosystem is ‘not dependent on external actors or
             non-transparent technologies’ due to the shortcomings we have outlined.
             Importantly, the open-source ecosystem should not be disproportionately privileged - whether
             in access to public procurement, funding, or in their contribution to sovereignty - over actors with
             a strong European presence that have systematically contributed to increasing the EU’s digital
             autonomy and resilience for decades.
             Still, we recognise the benefits of open source, as highlighted above, and the growing importance
             of these models, especially since many digital solutions integrate open-source software. In this
             regard, and to avoid replicating dependencies on the same foreign actors, the EU should ensure

C2 General
             it remains competitive in the open-source ecosystem and a comprehensive approach at EU level
             can help to do so.
             Vodafone proposes the following points to be taken into account when preparing the
             Communication:
             1. Consistent legal framework
             The current EU framework provides various definitions of open-source, including under the AI
             Act, Cyber Resilience Act, and Interoperable Europe Act. The Communication should address
             these variations and promote a concept of open-source that aligns with international
             understandings, such as the UN’s Open Source Principles. This means the promotion of secure by
             design open source adhering to open standards, designed to maximise scalability and reusability.
             This concept must take into consideration the specificities of the various digital technologies it
             seeks to cover (cloud, AI etc). When establishing this concept of open source, the Communication
             should make a distinction between commercially available open source and free and open source
             software, as done under the Cyber Resilience Act.
             2. Clear evaluation framework of sovereignty for open source application
             The Communication will need to address in detail how open source solutions can meet
             sovereignty objectives, including which are most important (interoperability level, availability of
             European technological support, dependencies on non-EU providers for hardware...) and how
             they apply to different technologies (AI, Cloud etc). This is not only key for the European open
             source ecosystem to develop coherently and for the purpose of improving the EU’s autonomy,
             but it is necessary for its uptake and adoption by companies across Europe. Establishing a
             recognised and consistent non-binding framework can provide CIOs with confidence when
             considering integrating open source solutions into their systems. This framework should be
             designed with the input from technology experts and companies using open source, and be
             subject to extensive and targeted consultation.
             3. Assurance of high cybersecurity levels
             Providing assurance for high cybersecurity levels is key for users integrating open-source into
             their systems, in particular critical infrastructure providers. Companies are often reluctant to
             integrate open source solutions due to concerns around the cybersecurity of the product. These
             legitimate concerns are related to unaddressed vulnerabilities, supply chain attacks, and data
             protection. Technology-specific security risks and requirements also exist, that transparency and
             provenance of AI code are perceived as specific challenges pertaining to that technology.
             However, several of these challenges can be addressed through compliance with the large body
             of EU legislation that tackles them (Cyber Resilience Act, GDPR, AI Act). In this respect, swift
             implementation of legislation, including the Cyber Resilience Act and adoption of its relevant
             standards is key. The EU’s Communication should encourage open source to demonstrate
             compliance with these requirements, which will increase trust in these solutions and increase

C2 General
             their uptakes by companies. for instance, the Linux foundation highlighted that transparency and
             provenance of AI code are perceived as specific challenges pertaining to that technology.
             However, several of these challenges can be addressed through compliance with the large body
             of EU legislation that tackles them (Cyber Resilience Act, GDPR, AI Act). In this respect, swift
             implementation of legislation, including the Cyber Resilience Act and adoption of its relevant
             standards is key. The EU’s Communication should encourage open source to demonstrate
             compliance with these requirements, which will increase trust in these solutions and increase
             their uptakes by companies.
             The Communication should also address how the EU can lead in standard setting and promotion.
             Issues with the uptake and use of commonly agreed open standards represents a key barrier to
             the adoption of open source as it significantly reduces interoperability – a key asset of these
             solutions.
             It is worth noting that free and open source software presents a number of additional
             cybersecurity challenges, including reduced security assurance, quality control, slower patching
             and more limited supply chain controls. As seen with the Log4Shell vulnerability, when paired
             with their widespread uptake and deeply embedded nature, these particularities create a rapidly
             exploitable security failure with far-reaching consequences. At Vodafone, we always apply a
             security-by-design approach, including when implementing free and open source software.
             However, if the Commission seeks to promote the widespread use of these solutions by
             companies, our view is that this should be accompanied by guidance providing a shared
             understanding of security risks and solutions. This would help CIOs assess the security levels of
             these solutions. These should be voluntary in nature to maintain user freedom to choose the
             most appropriate solution for its system. On that basis, the adoption of the delegated act
             proposed under the Cyber Resilience Act to establish security attestation of free and open-source
             software, compiled in consultation with security experts from the public and private sector, can
             be considered.
             4. Recognition of the international nature of open source, and its benefits
             We recognise the critical need for the public sector to have access to secure, scalable, and
             interoperable digital solutions and understand in this regard the importance of initiatives like the
             Digital Commons European Digital Infrastructure Consortium (EDIC). However, we underline that
             these initiatives themselves promote collaboration, even if just amongst European countries for
             EDIC, as a means of making these solutions more accessible and ultimately improving them
             technologically. An attempt to grow European open-source sector that seeks to be completely
             sovereign is not only misguided on the technology itself but would limit the added value from
             contributions outside this scope. Vodafone strongly opposes a version of sovereignty that would
             hamper technological innovation by restricting input from best-in-class providers.
             5. Considering that all open-source projects by default safer or more sovereign is misleading

C2 General
             Recommending that organisations of the public sector adopt an open-source first approach
             without properly assessing the risks posed by a given open-source technology, as outlined above,
             including security risks pose serious security concern. As we pointed out, with several open-
             sourced financially backed by non-European actors, this approach could also potentially increase
             or replicate dependencies. Adoption of these solution by the public and private sector should be
             gradual and only happen when these solutions are mature enough. The EU should therefore
             focus first on establishing a clear framework and boost EU leadership in open-source before
             proposing stricter measures such as by-default prioritisation of open source solutions in public
             procurement.
             6. Ensure appropriate funding is in place
             We welcome the Commission’s proposal to increase funding of the European open source
             ecosystem. To effectively contribute to increasing the EU’s market posture and contribute to its
             sovereignty ambitions, such funding should be directed to projects that align with the sovereignty
             components that would be agreed upon in the Communication (see above) and are compliant
             with EU standards and legislation. Ensuring that the EU has an adequately skilled workforce that
             can further develop and maintain the ecosystem is also necessary, to avoid outsourcing and
             increasing dependency on non-EU actors, and to ensure innovation.

C2 General