Ref. Ares(2026)1150761 - 02/02/2026

Tor Project’s feedback:

How to secure cybersecurity in open source projects:
Strong cybersecurity for open source is a combination of two things: (1) investment in
maintenance of the stack, and (2) investment in innovation. To encourage both of these
areas, the EU can:
    ●​ Invest in addressing technical debt, maintenance of open source solutions, and in
        securing supply chain weaknesses: https://www.sovereign.tech/ and
        https://www.opentech.fund/funds/free-and-open-source-software-sustainability-fund/
        are great examples of funds that prioritize these areas of investments.
    ●​ Invest in academic research and transitioning that research to practice:
            ○​ Foster the interest of the academic community in researching the security of
                open source solutions by investing in this type of research work.
            ○​ Create funds that will support open source solutions to implement defence
                mechanisms proposed by this research (transitioning into practice).
    ●​ Create specific incentives for open source solutions to adopt cutting-edge security
        such as post-quantum cryptography to futureproof encryption.

Importance of supporting open source digital rights tools to further security of
EU tech sovereignty initiatives with local business and public sector:
Open source digital rights tools is a technology sector that doesn’t receive the same type of
investment as other sectors.

However, innovation in areas of privacy and cybersecurity often comes from digital rights
projects. Take Signal as an example, not only Signal is a tool used by millions in the private
and public sectors, but its protocol has also been adopted by other private tools from the
industry: WhatsApp, Messenger, Google Chat, Skype, and so on. Another example is Tor
Browser, which is now the base for Mullvad Browser, a privacy browser offered by the
Swedish company Mullvad.

There is a proposal for a Europe Digital Rights Fund
[https://miaan.org/the-european-union-needs-a-digital-rights-fund/], which would be a great
mechanism to invest in innovative open source digital rights tech that chooses privacy and
security by design. This will help create and maintain gold-standard software that protects
the digital rights of its users, as well as create the privacy and security building blocks for
other technology.

While thinking locally you must understand that open source is global:
and therefore supporting community contributor engagement and management activities to
improve the health of volunteer contributor communities and the quality of their contributions
must also be a global effort that considers global context.

The strength of open source maintenance and innovation is its diverse community. The
nature of open source communities is borderless. And it’s important to include that in the
strategy. Recognize that some projects might have contributors from other regions or some
solutions might depend on open sources developed from other regions. While thinking of
financial incentive for open source that can boost the development of local solutions for
Europe, it is important to also have flexibility to embrace the spirit of open source
collaboration that will expand to regions outside of Europe.