Ref. Ares(2026)1126331 - 01/02/2026

I strongly encourage a “European Open Digital Ecosystems” strategy and to scale-up funding for
Free Open-Source Software (FOSS) accordingly.

The focus of “European Open Digital Ecosystems” strategy should lie primarily on non-profit
organisations, as these rely more on non-market support. Profitable Open-Source solutions with a
market case should be supported by other means of the commission, by linking them to other areas
of funding – by designing the toolboxes accordingly: To name a few, the European Innovation
Fund, or the European Competitiveness Fund. There lies a key opportunity to bring commercial
Open-Source solutions to market readiness.
The strongest support, the commission can give, is to establish a along support, a strategy for
institutional adoption of (F)OSS for the EU with explicit recommendation for member states
(aligning to the sovereignty strategy), as the costs for institutional IT software dwarf any other
funding for open-source software up to now. Leveraging this potential, will change the full
landscape.

What the “European Open Digital Ecosystems” strategy should do in direct support, is focus only
on FOSS, meaning non-profit organisations with ideally European or open stewardship (still,
explicitly welcoming transcontinental teams). Part of this should be consistent goals for FOSS,
requiring throughout (among others):
   • openness (FOSS)
   • interoperability (connecting to and developing established standards)
   • good quality code
   • efficient implementations (environmentally friendly)
   • security and privacy (through data scarcity)

The initiative should further support the full FOSS community by addressing explicitly the whole
supply chain from a bottom-up approach:

                                    High-impact FOSS projects
                                      by ecosystem synergies

                                    Strong FOSS community
                                by ecosystem structural support and
                              democratic, interconnected communities

                             Strong basis of (small) FOSS projects
                       by minimal support schemes and sponsor mechanisms

                               Funding schemes for FOSS ecosystems

At the basis:
As the FOSS community is diverse, heterogenous, and plenty, it often relies on hundreds of smaller
projects and libraries, often maintained from few or a single developer. Still, these are often critical
parts of the supply chain (libraries, drivers, support and fixes, ...).
The problem of these small projects is, on the other hand, that they won’t be approaching
institutions for funding – as barriers and administration effort are far to high. Usually, support of
these is only possible by actively approaching them.
To support the basis of FOSS development, one should
   •   Define funding explicitly for small, critical FOSS projects, according to the general goals of
       the FOSS ecosystem strategy
   •   approach central, established institutions (as the Free Software Foundation), for distribution
       to small projects at the bottom of the supply chain (similar to existing cascading ideas).
   •   allow for minimal funding payments to projects and contributors (e.g. a thousand Euros, or
       regular small payments), with minimal financial audit obligations (like establishing a
       honorary fee category, with only need of proof of payment, link of project/code and
       description). This should be compatible with established support mechanisms as GitHub
       sponsors. A long term goal could be establishing a similar platform in Europe.

At the centre:
A main challenge for projects lies in establishing a ecosystem in a lasting and competitive way.
Here, the commission could take the chance and: Assess relevant non-profit-stakeholders, which a)
benefit immensely from establishing a supporting non-volunteer structure and with a possible “first-
funding”, or b) have a critical role in the FOSS ecosystem, i.e., high relevance or potential.
These projects should be supported not just by project-based funding as currently, but by structural
funding, as established from other volunteer-based context (e.g. Youth work). This funding should
address establishing personnel for an organisation, also for just administrative tasks, coordination or
outreach. Fixed support positions enable organisations to professionalise and scale-up.
Additionally, such funding should make it possible to establish democratic structures and
interconnections of the FOSS community. A main aspect should be making structural funding
available also for assemblies, conferences and hackathons. Especially in volunteer-driven FOSS
development, these events often have a greater impact than paid staff. Therefore, structural funding
should be able to cover location rent, travel and material costs, related to community events. Most
effective can this be when providing security in long-term structural funding (>2 years) to enable
job security and event continuity.

At the top:
Here, the commission should refine the current funding strategy by maximising impact:
    • identifying gaps of products and barriers that hinder wide-scale FOSS adoption and projects
        that can fill them.
    • establishing HE-style “synergy grants” that connect several FOSS actors to cooperate and
        establish compatibility and bigger ecosystems, or the fusion/convergence of similar projects.
These should prioritise (using and creating) ecosystems over individual projects to leverage impact
and adoption.

I think, when including these suggestions, the “European Open Digital Ecosystems” strategy can
encourage more FOSS and attract projects under an European umbrella. FOSS can guarantee
individual and social sovereignty and resilient democratic structure.

With kind regards.