Ref. Ares(2026)1225867 - 03/02/2026

   Call for Evidence on the European Open Digital Ecosystem Strategy

             Feedback by Jehan Pagès, GIMP Maintainer

Background

I am the maintainer and main developer of GIMP, a widely known Community-driven Free
Software for high-end image creation and manipulation. Our software has reached the old age (for a
software!) of 30 years in 2025 and is downloaded several dozens of thousands times a day. A
large portion of European citizens and organizations likely have GIMP installed on their computers.

GIMP is entirely developed by volunteers, from all across the world, some of which are doing it as
a hobby, others trying to make a living. In the context of this feedback, it is useful to state that the
development has been led by European citizens for more than a decade. I am myself French and
living in France.

Despite all of this, even a huge software like GIMP never felt particularly supported by
governments or the European Union. Therefore we are very much interested about such an initiative
which may initiate a change.

Strength and Weaknesses of the EU Open-Source sector
Though many Free Software projects have ties to the US, the field reality is that a major part of
development is actually EU-based. This is the case of GIMP, but also of many other major software.

The ties to the US usually take the shape of umbrella organizations, "fiscal hosts". This is also our
case historically, though we did consider various times to change to an European fiscal host, or have
a second entity here.

Clearly the European Union has nothing to be ashamed of, in terms of software capability. It has the
technical skills and "brains". Yet it has not been making it easy for these skilled people to organize
themselves in non-governmental organizations. Furthermore many European countries are not
considering organizations creating Free and Open Source Software as "public interest" projects,
allowing tax deductible donations, known to be a really helpful way to support non-governmental
organizations.

Therefore it is very clear to me that the European Union has all the necessary "seeds" for growing
an extremely strong, secure and sovereign Free and Open Source ecosystem. If the governments
were to start facilitating and supporting umbrella organizations producing these software, and
officially declare the associated work as of public interest, hence making donations tax-deductible
(for any European Union citizen donating to any European Union NGO creating Free and Open
Source Software — even if not in the same EU country —, as defined per their license from a list of
known licenses in order to avoid parasitic projects), this would break one of the main barriers
blocking many Free and Open Source projects from having their fiscal host in Europe.

Added value of Open Source for the public and private sector
Some affirm that proprietary software (often US-based) may be better. Though this itself is
debatable, what is not debatable is: imagine if a Community, Free Software project like us had the
same funds. Imagine if instead of having companies and public organizations paying millions of
EUR in licenses every year, they funded Free and Open Source Software. The situation would
improve so fast that none would be able to affirm anymore that proprietary software is better.

The question had been biased from the start if you compare multi-billion dollar companies with
projects often born out of community (made of extremely skilled people, for sure, but still with very
limited means, often unable to make a living from their Free and Open Source contributions, hence
requiring a "food job"). So we need to change the question’s context.

In the long run, funding Open Source project will be a lot more effective and a lot cheaper than
paying licenses for proprietary software.

But the bigger added value of Free Software is not just the price. You have actual control over your
software! Say you find a bug or you need a feature. If the publisher is one of the huge US
corporation, if you happen to be a huge European company or governmental organization, you
might be able to get a support contract. It will cost a lot (money which will therefore leaves the EU
towards the US) and you would not be certain it will be exactly how you want. You will also not be
certain that no backdoor will exfiltrate your data and that foreign governments may not request your
data (through for instance the USA PATRIOT Act).
The software publisher may also simply refuse. They are a business and have such right.

With Free Software, any private or public institutions can simply organize to fix or improve the
software. Even for small organizations, or even simple citizens, if you are many enough, you can
join together and organize to fund developers on a shared project and customize the software
exactly how you need it. This is not only cheaper, it is like a super-power which is impossible
otherwise. In the end, you take advantage of dozens of years of international collaboration by
extremely skilled individuals thanks to which you obtain 99% of the software for free and you add
the remaining 1% to get exactly what you need.

This is not theoretical and I have experience of this. For instance, I work with a graphical artist who
was a teacher at CY Cergy Paris University for several years. One year, she encountered an
annoying bug in GIMP, which she asked me about. I fixed it this same day and the next day, she
could show what she needed to to her students. This kind of things is impossible when you have no
control of your tools.

Another example is that I regularly work for a Libre Art animation film making production,
producing completely Free movies with Free Software. We completely control our tools for the
production. Now our "power" is limited since it is such a small entity with limited funds. But you
can only imagine what a bigger entity can do with ability to tweak their working tools however they
need.

To conclude, it is obvious that Open Source tools drive innovation and that they would give anyone
the power to do anything they need to do (you still need to give yourselves the means to this end by
doing some work or paying people, but the point is that it is possible at all! It is not possible with
proprietary software). Nothing beats the full control of your means of production. No risk of a
software publisher suddenly pulling the rug under you, no lock in, no sudden fee changes or
increasing subscription rates, no losing your data anymore because of unwanted format changes.

Note: this is not by far the only “added value” of Open Source, but such a feedback document is
not enough to list all the advantages so I went for the main point in my opinion: the control of your
tools.
Concrete Measures
As a conclusion, here are suggested measures and actions to be taken at EU level:

   •   Facilitate the creation of non-governmental organizations developing Free and Open Source
       Software.
   •   Grant such NGOs the "public interest" label, hence allowing individuals and companies to
       donate to software they use, encouraged with tax deduction for their donations. This would
       help making sure important software are sustainably developed and maintained, and will
       support their growth and evolution.
   •   Support Free Software projects financially through a EU funds. Not only the web
       infrastructure software, or AI, but also desktop software.
   •   Public institutions should use Free Software on servers and desktops. This would span
       from the OS (Linux) to desktop software (LibreOffice, GIMP, etc.). This must be
       accompanied by proper training of civil servants because one of the common error for
       failed migrations are often lack of training rather than software issues.
   •   The European Union should also have their own internal teams of developers. You should
       not only rely on funding external teams. The EU should take "ownership" of the technology
       they use by actually contributing.
       You find a bug? You may report it. But if you can fix it and contribute a patch proactively,
       it’s even better. By sharing teams across countries, combined to supporting upstream
       developers of projects, this would also share the costs, making this all extremely cheap and
       efficient while allowing extreme adaptability of software for your needs.
   •   Software patents should be banned. They only impede innovation.
   •   Education should prioritize Free Software. One of the biggest point of entries of all the
       big US proprietary software are simply schools. By training young generations to specific
       software, they ensure most of them won't ever want to change. All the big corporations
       know this, which is why they are giving special "discounts" to schools and universities.
       These discounts are nothing more than the "free drug sample" of street dealers, at industrial
       level. And school directors signing such contracts are complicit. The European Union should
       put a stop to this and prioritize Free and Open Source tools in academic curriculum.

Technology Area to prioritize
I believe this is up to each entity to determine what they use and what they really need. Such choice
should not be influenced by trends. In particular do not forget the software which you take for
granted. Often it means these may be the most critical ones in your work, and therefore what you
should prioritize to make sure it stays relevant and sustainable.
If I stick to our own case for instance, we know GIMP is massively used in public administration,
which makes sense since graphics are everywhere! Some topics are fancier (3D, video, AI, web…).
But still images are used even more than videos. So I do hope a EU initiative for Open Source
would not forget any of these base projects (both infrastructure and desktop) which everyone take
for granted (until they are not and then you realize too late the error when the software is in critical
condition).

Sectors which would benefit from increase use of Open Source
I believe any sector would benefit from Free and Open Source Software. It is as simple as that. As
said, it is about the control of your tools. Do you want to leave this control in the hands of someone
else?