Ref. Ares(2026)1225631 - 03/02/2026

Wikimedia Foundation Contribution to the
European Commission Call for Evidence:
Towards European Open Digital Ecosystems

The Wikimedia Foundation welcomes the European Commission’s initiative to develop
a strategic approach towards open digital ecosystems.

We are the nonprofit organization that hosts open-source-powered free knowledge
projects such as Wikipedia, Wikimedia Commons, Wikidata, and others, and supports
the volunteer communities that create, govern, and curate these projects in the public
interest. For over 20 years, the Foundation has contributed to the development of
MediaWiki, the free and open-source software (OSS) behind the Wikimedia projects.
This open-source software makes it possible to distribute the content—e.g., text,
images, data, media files—that hundreds of thousands of volunteers contribute monthly
to our projects, free of charge and free to use under Creative Commons licenses. In
addition, the Foundation facilitates the contribution of code and other technical input
from a global community of volunteers. For the Wikimedia Foundation, the open digital
ecosystem encompasses the open-source software, the volunteer contributor
community who build on the software, as well as the freely licensed content that they
share and sustain.

Wikipedia is the world’s largest free and open encyclopedia, accessed more than 15
billion times every month by readers from around the world seeking knowledge. In
2025, Wikipedia and Wikidata were recognized by the Digital Public Goods Alliance
(DPGA) as digital public goods: open-source software, data, AI models, standards and
content created for the public interest that can help achieve the Sustainable

                                                                                            1
Development Goals and improve the lives of billions of people worldwide. These two
repositories of open knowledge are of significant global importance and impact, and
are powered by open-source software and content that volunteers develop and
contribute from across the world, including in the European Union.

During more than 20 years of building and maintaining the technical infrastructure and
supporting the volunteer community required to advance the Wikimedia projects, we
have seen how open source contributes not only to technological development and
information integrity, but also to resilience, transparency, and trust in the digital
sphere. This submission aims to contribute evidence and perspectives on the role of
open source as part of a broader digital public infrastructure ecosystem. It highlights
the importance of openness in supporting technological capacity and information
integrity, as well as in enabling a thriving and sustainable digital commons that serve
the public interest alongside economic and innovation objectives.

1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector?
What are the main barriers that hamper (i) adoption and maintenance of
high-quality and secure open source; and (ii) sustainable contributions to
open‑source communities?

Strengthening the EU open-source sector

The strengths of the EU open source sector include certain legal and policy frameworks
that enable the development of the open source ecosystem, and serving as the home to
several important and foundational open-source software projects. The intermediary
liability protections within the e-Commerce Directive are one such example. The EU’s
interest in technological independence and resilience fosters development of open

                                                                                     2
technologies and software that support the digital commons: digital resources,
including content, that belong to and can be used by everyone.

Barriers in the EU open source sector

Barriers include regulatory compliance burdens that are often designed for
well-resourced commercial software providers, but which disproportionately affect
non-commercial, open-source software projects and the volunteer contributors and
small organisations that sustain them as these often do not have the legal departments
or compliance budgets which the design of the regulatory compliance assumes.

In addition, many of these large, commercial providers make heavy use of the
resources—e.g., datasets, content, code scripts—that are created and shared by the
open source ecosystem. Data and content in the public domain are often used by
commercial providers to create closed product ecosystems with better resourcing that
directly compete with the open source entities from which they drew. Without a
marketplace model that rewards a commitment to open source development, the result
is a commercial field that crowds out sustainment pathways intended to grow the
projects and volunteer communities that underpin the open source ecosystem.

Finally, despite multiple efforts (for example: the Open Source Program Offices or
OSPOs; the EU Sovereign Tech Fund [EU-STF]; the European Digital Infrastructure
Consortium [EDIC]), there is not yet sufficient funding to build, develop and maintain
the infrastructure required to sustain the abundance of open source projects in Europe.

2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private
sectors? Please provide concrete examples, including the factors (such as

                                                                                      3
cost, risk, lock-in, security, innovation, among others) that are most
important to assess the added value.

Open source as a driver of European technological capacity

A thriving open source sector is essential for European technical resilience. It helps
develop technical skills in the region required to advance innovations such as
cybersecurity resilience, and provides crucial ingredients for commercial technological
development and investments. On the commercial side, open source is a force
multiplier that enables Europe to do more with less.

A Linux Foundation report measuring the economic value of open source found
Fortune 500 company respondents listed three key benefits of using open-source
software: cost savings, faster development speed, and open standards and
interoperability (p. 11). Cost savings were attributed to lower total cost of ownership
and higher productivity, which are easy to understand considering that respondents
estimated the use of proprietary solutions, including support and maintenance, would
have cost four times or more than the investment required for open-source software (p.
14).

These report findings align with our own experiences. Our selections of Debian, PHP,
and MariaDB have allowed Wikipedia and other Wikimedia projects to flourish and
endure for 25 years, and have also enabled us to steer their future independently of the
whims of commercial software vendors. For example, the Wikimedia Foundation took
over the maintenance of an essential open source collaboration tool, Phabricator, when
a commercial provider exited the market. Investing in open-source software has also
nurtured a community of contributors who have developed significant technical
expertise to the extent that they can advise the Foundation’s product and technology
innovations. As explained earlier, our own MediaWiki software regularly benefits from

                                                                                      4
volunteer contributions—i.e., code and other technical input—that add functionality
and capability as well as help maintain the software.

Such independence is critical for a European Union facing significant geopolitical and
economic pressures on its digital infrastructure. Investment in the open source
ecosystem    advances   digital resilience because it can secure infrastructure
independence as well as create the local talent necessary to continue to drive
innovation and independence without sending big checks to large foreign companies.

Finally, a robust open source ecosystem is foundational for the existence of a
flourishing digital commons, and that digital commons provides core open source
building blocks that help EU companies develop their technology stacks. A robust open
source ecosystem is characterized by a growing base of active contributors, sufficient
funding, and is supported by a diverse community with the skills required to advance
software and content quality by dealing with issue management, release processes,
continuous integration, and contribution guidelines. When these conditions are in
place, European companies and innovators can learn from, reuse, and adapt open
source components from the digital commons such as openly licensed programming
language and data repositories, as well as media and research reports. These conditions
require governments to actively invest in the digital commons by encouraging the use
of Creative Commons and other similar licenses, freely and openly distributing their
own works and any publicly funded works, and providing public interest platforms and
open-source software with the necessary liability and copyright exemptions.​

Sustaining a healthy open source ecosystem requires a flourishing digital commons and
championing of European values

                                                                                     5
Investment in a flourishing digital commons, when underpinned by a clear
commitment to European values—including human rights, cultural diversity,
transparency, and privacy—is an investment in essential infrastructure for the
European open digital ecosystem.

Digital infrastructure should be based on open source so that the digital commons built
on it can thrive and contribute to reinforcing EU technological resilience and cultural
values. Free and open knowledge projects like Wikipedia and Wikidata have the
capacity to help maintain information integrity thanks to their distributed and
human-led content creation and moderation processes.

The volunteer communities behind the Wikimedia projects collaborate primarily along
linguistic lines rather than national borders. This distributed governance model
enables sustained scrutiny, transparent editorial processes, and the use of reliable
sourcing standards, contributing to the provision of neutral and verifiable information
at global scale. Such an approach has proven resilient to false and misleading
information, and is at the core of the reliability of the information on Wikipedia, since
volunteer contributors are able to collectively identify, contextualize, and address
coordinated manipulation efforts through open discussion and consensus-building.
Open source contributions and collaboration improve security through transparency as
vulnerabilities can be detected and fixed more effectively than in closed, opaque
systems. This is as true for false information in open source text as it is for
vulnerabilities in code.

At the same time, the multilingual structure of the Wikimedia model promotes cultural
and linguistic diversity by enabling communities to document knowledge in their own
languages and cultural contexts, helping safeguard pluralism online.

                                                                                       6
Together, these characteristics illustrate how digital public goods can reinforce trust,
resilience, and diversity in the information ecosystem, while providing shared
infrastructure that supports Europe’s broader digital autonomy and democratic
objectives. Open source can make knowledge infrastructure more resilient, secure, and
trustworthy, at the same time as they reduce costs and stimulate innovation.

3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to
support the development and growth of the EU open-source sector and
contribute to the EU’s technological sovereignty and cybersecurity
agenda?

Recognition of open source technology as a distinct public good, apart and separate
from other categories of software and their corresponding regulation, can create the
foundation for broader public support of open source. Recognition and support of
important public institutions that rely on open source technology, such as Wikipedia,
can help to connect public investment in open source infrastructure with the general
public’s experience of digital goods and services.

Commercial entities that use open-source software should be incentivized to contribute
back to the open source ecosystem, whether by opening up their own software or
contributing to the projects that are critical to the success of these commercial entities:
for example, through procurement processes that reward meaningful open source
participation and contribution. This responsibility should not rest on the goodwill of
companies. Continued and additional support for foundational open infrastructure
technologies remains key to providing a healthy ecosystem of alternatives and choices.
More choices creates better software in the entire marketplace, both open source and
commercial. ​

                                                                                         7
​
Regarding the heavy use and potential exploitation of the digital commons and open
knowledge by commercial actors training proprietary large language models (LLM), the
EU can promote incentive structures that enable fair and sustainable compensation for
resources created by the open source ecosystem that in turn benefit commercial aims.
Fair compensation can be both financial and strategic. Strategic initiatives can include
requirements to highlight the sources of content from which closed large language
model systems benefit, as well as supporting the growth of the community of volunteer
contributors to open source projects across the EU.

Financial initiatives should not take the form of complicated copyright licensing
schemes that make sharing information online less accessible, but instead should find
other ways to recognize and compensate for the outsized burden commercial use can
put on these resources compared to private use. Wikimedia Enterprise is one example
of a fair compensation system that encourages commercial entities to give back.
Through Enterprise, the Foundation is able to offer contracts that benefit commercial
entities like Pleias via higher volume data access, service level agreements,
product-specific features, and open partnership work. These contracts do not diminish
public availability of the Wikimedia projects’ resources, and they provide remuneration
for the level of data access that companies of Pleias’ size and scope require.

4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why?

Prioritize technology that provides and promotes greater access to software tools and
systems and that helps to safeguard and assure such systems. The greatest strength of
open source is that it offers the opportunity for innovation to everyone. Security in
well-supported open source projects is enhanced over private commercial software,

                                                                                      8
because there are more opportunities to inspect the code, find problems, and get fixes
from contributors in the open source community. More participants in open source
create innovations that benefit everyone: the general public, government agencies,
nonprofit institutions, and commercial enterprises.

5. In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to increased
competitiveness and cyber resilience?

Cyber resilience is important at all levels of the technology stack, and so a
multi-pronged effort is crucial. For the Wikimedia projects, cyber resilience includes
tools that help us defend our infrastructure against Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
attacks and indiscriminate scraping by content reusers, and also the tools that we use
and provide to administrators in order to protect user privacy as well as freedom of
contribution, and to defend and maintain the quality of information on the projects. In
addition, tools that fight false and misleading information are critical for public
knowledge consumption.

Conclusion

Open source plays a critical role in shaping a digital ecosystem that is resilient, secure,
and oriented toward the public interest. As the European Union advances its
technological independence and cybersecurity agenda, policies that recognise the
structural value of open digital infrastructure will be essential to ensuring long-term
sustainability, interoperability, and trust.

                                                                                         9
The Wikimedia Foundation encourages the European Commission to place open source
and open digital infrastructure at the centre of its strategic vision. Doing so will help
ensure that Europe’s digital future is competitive and innovative, while remaining
firmly grounded in openness, collaboration, and the public interest.

                                                                                      10