Ref. Ares(2026)1073424 - 30/01/2026

    Reclaiming European Ownership for Long-Term
                     Resilience
With competitiveness as the current political term’s bread and butter, the
absence of retention of ownership from the discourse misses a core point of
the present EU economic and social reality. An unprecedented change of
ownership is about to put the European economy up for sale, with a ‘silver
tsunami’ of European baby boomer business owners retiring in the coming
decade. Estimates show that 30% of business owners are over the age of 55
(European Commission, 2022), while an Austrian study further highlights
that nearly one-third of them have no succession plan, a pattern also
detected in Poland, Spain and Finland (Schiefer et al., 2019).

With US private equity giants persuading European entrepreneurs to sell off
their valuable businesses for irresistible amounts of money, and American
venture capital funds cleverly poaching EU startups and scaleups with the
most innovative potential, we continue to lose assets, taxes, jobs,
autonomy and intellectual property to Wall Street and Silicon Valley.
European businesses run the risk of effectively falling into the hands of
owners driven solely by short-term financial profits. This short-termism is
fundamentally incompatible with the EU’s long-term competitiveness
agenda, which calls for patient capital and future orientation.

Ownership models play a pivotal role in reversing this trend. Steward-owned
and employee-owned companies, such as Denmark’s Novo Nordisk and the
UK’s John Lewis & Partners (see Box 1 and 2), demonstrate every day that
long-term business resilience is not only possible, but already achieved. If
the EU is serious about creating global champions, it must look to the
enterprises that have already excelled in their industries precisely because
of their long-term ownership structures.

Short-term capital, long-term damage
Every year, around 400.000 European businesses change ownership, with
continuity being threatened in roughly one-third of the cases (European
Commission, 2022). Retiring entrepreneurs that cannot find a family

                                                                                  1
agreement or a suitable European partner have no other option than
turning to market players that have no affinity with their businesses. The
only two options available for succession are then selling their company on
the stock exchange or giving in to extractive acquisitions by (mostly US)
private equity giants.

Since 2015, assets under management by US groups in the EU more than
doubled, resulting in US asset managers holding 31% of total EU assets
(Financial Times, 2024). Among these are private equity firms actively
hunting for family-owned SMEs lacking succession plans, often securing
deals through predatory buyout offers. These deals trigger destructive
internal restructurings aimed at maximising short-term profitability, at the
expense of the enterprise’s continuity and resilience. Not only does this
erode the EU’s competitive industrial base, but it also leads to the transfer of
valuable assets, tax revenues and intellectual property to the US market.

Empirical research has shown that such practices are also a significant
driver of job loss across Europe (Davis et al., 2013). The German Development
Institute further estimates that around 100.000 jobs are threatened every
year due to the absence of sustainable succession options for privately
owned businesses in Europe (Schwartz, 2023).

Similarly, American venture capital (VC) funds scout European start-ups
and scale-ups in search of early-stage or growth equity opportunities.
Given the EU’s still fragmented capital markets, even the most innovative
firms often struggle to source adequate funding nationally. As a result, not
only US investors account for 35% of investment in the European scale-up
ecosystem (State of European Tech, 2024), but 15% of EU scale-ups have
already relocated abroad, most notably to the US (EIB, 2024). Once again,
this leads to a loss of EU strategic assets, talent, jobs and competitive value
to the US economy.

At the core of these practices lies a short-termist rationale of value-
extraction over value-creation: a strong focus on short-term financial returns
to the benefit of shareholder, instead of a focus on creating economic value
for the future of the company and consequently the European economy. In
a private equity buyout, new owners typically launch internal restructuring
programmes aimed at reorganising the company and cutting costs, often
at the expense of its original purpose and value. These measures are
designed to maximise profits and sustain rising dividend payments to
shareholders, enhancing the firm’s financial appeal so it can later be sold at
a higher price.

                                                                              2
When short-term-oriented and profit-maximising ownership takes over the
economy, the latter suffers from a system leakage, where financial and
strategic resources are diverted for private gain rather than reinvested
into the company or society. With this driving the whole system, the result
is a slowdown in overall innovation and long-term competitiveness, that
exacerbates economic vulnerability rather than fostering the resilience of
European industries.

Profit vs viability
Steward-ownership and employee-ownership models are designed to
retain capital within the business, ensuring it is reinvested in long-term
development rather than extracted as shareholder profit. Purpose-driven by
design, steward-ownership and employee-ownership models rely on
patient capital to maximise their impact, prioritising the well-being of the
employees and the long-term resilience of the enterprise.1 They offer non-
extractive alternatives to conventional ownership structures and have
proven effective in preserving the core values that matter most to
committed entrepreneurs.

A characteristic feature of these models is the capital lock, which prevents
the distribution of profits to shareholders or members with control
rights. By separating control rights from economic rights, these structures
ensure that those steering the company’s strategic direction are not
financially incentivised to prioritise short-term gains. Instead, decisions
reflect the company’s purpose, long-term viability and stakeholder interests.

This alignment unlocks the innovative and competitive potential of
businesses by channelling profits back into operations, research and
workforce development. While some EU member states have taken steps to
enable these structures, they remain insufficiently recognised and
supported at the EU level.

Denmark and Sweden, for example, have introduced legislation that
facilitates the transition to steward-ownership, particularly for founders
seeking succession options that are in line with their values. Slovenia, home
to many employee-owned business, is exploring ways to use EU Cohesion
Funds to expand access to such models. The EU should build on these
experiences to make these options viable exit strategies and financing

1
 For a deep dive into both steward-ownership and employee-ownership, refer to: N-EXT
LAW, 2024, Sustainable by Design: Industrial Policy for Long-Term Competitiveness in the
EU.
                                                                                       3
pathways for future-driven entrepreneurs, particularly those unwilling to
see their life’s work depleted by ownership solely driven by profit.

Resilient ownership in practice
When a company seeks additional funding or aims at reaping some of the
advantages of being publicly listed, these models accommodate for a dual-
class share structure. In such arrangements, the steward- and employee-
owned entity retains the majority stake and therefore the decisive control
over the company, ensuring that strategic decisions remain aligned with its
long-term mission (Sanders, 2024). A minority class of shares is then listed
on the stock exchange, with limited voting rights and minimal entitlement
to the firm’s profits, so that external shareholders can participate financially
without holding veto power over the controlling state.

Capital locks, separation of rights and dual-class share structures allow for a
maximisation of the innovative and competitive potential of a business,
because more money is reinvested into its value and forward-looking
objectives. While widespread and enabled in some EU member states,
steward-ownership and employee-ownership structures are not yet
facilitated EU-wide.

The EU should make two channels for ownership transfer available to
entrepreneurs, particularly considering the urgent need for future-proof
succession options. These models can cater to different types and sizes of
companies.

First, the EU should mandate its member states to introduce a dedicated
legal form for ‘steward-ownership’. Prominent examples such as Maersk,
Novo Nordisk, Zeiss and Bosch demonstrate how this model can succeed,
often through a dual-class share structure that safeguards the company’s
mission while still enjoying substantial access to capital markets (See Box 1
below).

This structure enables sustained investment in R&D while fostering a
culture of purpose, making these firms internationally competitive as well
as attractive employers. Thanks to their longer-term horizons, steward-
owned companies are thus inherently more resilient and profitable than
firms with a corporate ownership structure. Yet, within the EU, they still lack
the legal and fiscal infrastructure to emerge and be used as a credible
governance form.

                                                                              4
    Box 1. Novo Nordisk as a steward-owned company.

    Novo Nordisk is a Danish pharmaceutical company and one of Europe’s largest
    enterprises by market capitalisation, thanks to its significant investment into
    diabetes drug research in the early 2000. The company adopted a steward-
    ownership structure, which enabled a long-term approach to research and a
    purpose-driven operating model. This strategy proved highly successful, as by
    the late 2000s Novo Nordisk had patented Ozempic, a breakthrough treatment
    for type 2 diabetes and weight loss.

    The company is ultimately controlled by the Novo Nordisk Foundation through
    its full ownership of Novo Holdings A/S, which has complete oversight on the
    company’s assets, governance and strategic direction. Novo Nordisk’s share
    capital is structured into dual classes: 28% of the total share capital is held by
    Novo Holdings A/S in the form of A shares, which carry 10 votes per share and
    account for 75% of the total voting rights. The remaining B shares, publicly
    traded on the market, carry one vote per share. This structure ensures that
    control remains with those committed to the company’s long-term mission
    and impact, shielding it from short-term market pressures.

Second, the EU should recognise and support the role of employee-
ownership in strengthening business resilience and long-term
competitiveness. Countries such as the US (1974), the UK (2014), and Canada
(2024) adopted dedicated legislation enabling employees to purchase a
company’s shares from departing owners through a special purpose
vehicle, typically a trust, via a leveraged buyout (see Box 2 below). This
model, known as an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP),2 holds
significant potential as a succession strategy.

In the US, 10% of the private-sector workforce is employed by ESOP
companies, the majority of which adopted the model to address ownership
succession (National Center for Employee Ownership, 2022). In the UK,
ESOP buyouts were the second most common exit strategy for business
owners in 2023 and 2024 (evelyn Partners, 2024). While countries like
Slovenia are moving to institutionalise this, the success of employee-
ownership as a forward-looking, structural solution to Europe’s silver
tsunami, will require EU-level legal and financial facilitation.

2
 For an explanation of how this model works, see David Ellerman, Tej Gonza, and Gregor
Berkopec, “European Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP): The Main Structural
Features and Pilot Implementation in Slovenia,” SN Business & Economics 2, no. 12 (2022)
                                                                                           5
    Box 2. John Lewis & Partners as an employee-owned business.

    The owner of John Lewis department stores and Waitrose supermarkets is the
    largest employee-owned enterprise in the UK. It is 100% owned by the John
    Lewis Partnership, a perpetual trust that holds the company’s shares on behalf
    of its employees.

    The company’s annual profits are primarily reinvested in the business, with a
    portion distributed as bonuses among the 74,000 employees-owners. The trust
    holds voting rights, enabling it to take key decisions on strategic and executive
    leadership. Meanwhile, control rights are exercised collectively by employees
    through the Partnership Council, an elected body that represents the workforce
    and provides input on the company’s overall direction and culture.

    In this model, typical shareholder rights are vested in a trust accountable to its
    employees, ensuring that decisions are guided by the company’s long-term
    purpose and the well-being of its workers.

Ongoing efforts to revive the 28th regime and design an EU-wide company
form present a timely opportunity to recognise and legitimise such long-
term ownership structures, making them viable succession and scale-up
pathways for European entrepreneurs committed to preserving their
company’s purpose in the future. Embedding these non-extractive models
as an option for a pan-European company form would provide committed
business owners with more forward-looking and resilient options, while
enhancing the competitiveness of the European economy.

Conclusion
The EU currently lacks the capacity to nurture its own ecosystem of
innovative companies, largely due to insufficient support for ownership
retention and to the absence of credible, future-proof succession options in
its legislative framework. As part of the 28th regime, the design of a European
company should prioritise ownership structures that genuinely enable the
growth of innovative and competitive industries across Europe.

By doing so, the EU would catalyse a shift away from short-termism towards
more forward-looking business models, anchoring capital within the single
market and driving innovation through Europe’s existing competitive
advantage. Rather than setting out aspirations for the EU to be more like
the US, the former has the chance to chart its own path, building upon its
own strengths and history.3

3
 See, for example, Jan-Peter Balkenende and Govert Buijs, Capitalism Reconnected.
Toward a Sustainable, Inclusive and Innovative Market Economy in Europe, Amsterdam
                                                                                         6
References
Davis, S. J., Haltiwanger, J. C., Handley, K., Jarmin, R. S., Lerner, J., & Miranda,
J. (2013). Private Equity, Jobs, and Productivity. National Bureau of
Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/papers/w19458?utm.

EIB. (2024). The scale-up gap—Financial market constraints holding back
innovative firms in the European Union.
https://www.eib.org/en/publications/20240130-the-scale-up-gap

European Commission. (2022). Study on Family Businesses in Europe.

evelyn Partners. (2024). Who’s selling, when, how and why?
https://www.evelyn.com/media/4c2p3yd4/business_exit_report-may-23-
final-web.pdf

Financial Times. (2024). The relentless advance of American asset
managers in Europe. https://www.ft.com/content/bc1b6eaf-dd5f-4e63-
b4dc-90a30e9bec58

National Center for Employee Ownership. (2022). Employee Ownership by
the Numbers. https://www.nceo.org/research/employee-ownership-by-the-
numbers

Sanders, A. (2024). Steward Ownership—Transformative Business
Ownership in Europe and Germany. In Sustainable by Design—Industrial
Policy for Long-Term Competitiveness in the EU.
https://www.nonextractivefuture.eu/publication/sustainable-by-design-
industrial-policy-for-long-term-competitiveness-in-the-eu/

Schiefer, J., Überwimmer, M., Füreder, R., & Costa, Y. (2019). Obstacles and
Challenges of Business Succession in Central Europe.
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Martina-
Gaisch/publication/325619557_Proceedings_Cross-
Cultural_Business_Conference_2018/links/5b190a9da6fdcca67b63453e/Proc
eedings-Cross-Cultural-Business-Conference-2018.pdf#page=286

Schwartz, M. (2023). Nachfolge-Monitoring Mittelstand 2022: Knappheit an
Nachfolgekandidaten nimmt zu, Misserfolge dürften häufiger werden.
German Development Institute (KfW).

State of European Tech. (2024). State of European Tech 2024. Investors.
https://www.stateofeuropeantech.com/chapters/investors

University Press, 2023. Marija Bartl, Reimagining Prosperity. Toward a New Imaginary of
Law and Political Economy in the EU, Cambridge University Press, 2024.
                                                                                          7
8