Ref. Ares(2026)435544 - 15/01/2026

1. Strength, weaknesses and barriers

The strength of the EU open-source sector is its vibrant community, which is more active than in
any other region (most involvement per capita). Adoption of open-source is hampered by vendor
lock-in from US and Chinese big-tech companies and strong lobbying. A shift to open-source in the
public sector and the investment of part of the former license fees towards the open-source sector
(funding developer time, infrastructure, etc) would significantly help the sector.

2. Added value
Since many projects are non-profit, all the funds invested in open-source directly contribute to
development and provide for tax-paying European citizens (the developers), thus providing more
direct (features and infrastructure) and indirect (taxes) public benefits than if the same amount were
given to for-profit structures. Please refer to multi-year NGI data for more details. Because
development is open-source there is very little risk for lock-in and the products can still used and
improved upon if the structure behind it goes out of business or stops existing.

3. Concrete measures

Mandating the use of open-source solutions when they exist in the public sector (administration and
schools) should be the main priority. Invest part of the former license fees towards the open-source
sector, either by paying for support or directly as subsidies.

4. Priorities

The main priority should be the development of a sovereign mobile ecosystem, as it is currently
dominated by the US (with Android, historically partly open-source but mostly locked by
proprietary components from Google, and iOS, entirely proprietary). Mobile Linux with
postmarketOS and European companies such as Jolla are potential contributors in this endeavour.
Second priority would be a viable browser for European citizen, to ensure that web engines and
standards are not also dominated by the Google/Apple duopoly, either by forking Firefox or by
investing in Servo. In terms of operating systems and desktop environments, Linux is already there,
but additional funding for accessibility would not hurt, and funding of alternatives such as BSD
could also ensure that additional options are available. Finally while it is open-source, the secure
communication sector is dominated by Signal, which is open-source but is US-based and has all its
infrastructure depending on US-based big-tech platforms. Finally, please do not forget all the open-
source libraries that are foundations of many ubiquitous tools and that every other tool therefore
depends on, since they tend to really struggle to get funding for their crucial work.

5. Sectors

All sectors should move to open-source to be more resilient. Education is the most crucial sector to
avoid lock-in of future generations (though this is currently partly unavoidable due to the headstart
of US and Chinese big-tech). Public administrations are the second priority since this is what
countries can change most quickly as is currently visible in Denmark and Germany, with major
benefits for the open-source sector.