Ref. Ares(2026)673803 - 21/01/2026

FOSS for digital sovereignty in the EU
The European Commission has posted a "call for evidence" on open source for digital
sovereignty. This seeks feedback from the public on how to reduce its dependency on software
from non-EU companies through Free and Open Source Software (FOSS).

This is my response, with proper formatting (the web form replies all seem to have gotten their
spaces collapsed) and for future reference.

The added value of FOSS
In times where international relations are tense, it is wise to invest in digital sovereignty. For
example, recently there was a controversy surrounding the International Criminal Court losing
access to e-mail hosted by Microsoft, a US company, for political reasons.

A year earlier, a faulty Crowdstrike update caused the largest IT outage in history. This was an
accident, but it was a good reminder of the power that rests in foreign hands. We have to
consider the possibility of a foreign government pressuring a company to issue a malicious
update on purpose. This update could target only specific countries.

Bringing essential infrastructure into EU hands makes sense. But why does this have to be
FOSS? For instance, the Crowdstrike incident could also have happened with FOSS.

With FOSS, one does not have to trust a single company to maintain high code quality and
security. Independent security researchers and programmers will be looking at this code with a
fresh perspective. It is also an industry truism that FOSS code tends to be higher quality, simply
because releasing bad code is too embarrassing.

FOSS also reduces vendor lock-in. One can switch vendors and keep using the same product
when for example the vendor:

   • goes bankrupt,
   • drops support for the product,
   • drastically increases prices,
   • decides on a different direction for the product than the user wants,
   • or gets acquired by a foreign company.

Therefore, FOSS brings sovereignty by not being at the mercy of a single vendor.

Public sector and consultancies
The EU can set a good example by starting in the public sector: government EU organisations
and those of the member states, as well as semi-government organisations like universities and
libraries. Closed source software still reigns supreme there. Only "established" companies may
apply to tenders. These often employ professionals certified in proprietary tech. This
encourages vendor lock-in. The existing dependency ensures lock-in for future projects, as
compatibility is often a key requirement.
These same vendors are ruthless and have repeatedly sabotaged FOSS migrations. Microsoft
was involved in multiple bribery scandals in The Netherlands, Roumania, Italy and Hungary,
for example. There have also been allegations of illegal deals that were never investigated, such
as with the LiMux project in Munich.

How the EU can help:

   • Fully commit to FOSS. Set a date by which all software used by the public sector must be
     FOSS and running on hardware within the EU, at fully EU-owned companies. No
     compromises, no excuses and no easy outs - those were the bane of previous efforts.
   • Map out missing requirements and pay EU consultancy firms to improve FOSS where it
     is lacking. This will also make said software also more attractive for large private
     organisations that provide essential services in the EU.

Concrete examples:

   • Many EU and member state institutes rely on American services for hosting or securing
     their e-mail. E-mail software is a complete commodity, for which there are good
     European alternatives, based on FOSS. It should be easy to switch.
   • Workstations for public servants typically run on Windows and use Microsoft Office.
     Switch these to a proven open operating system like Linux and office suite like
     LibreOffice.

In schools, informatics is typically taught using proprietary software. This is often cloud
software. Schools do not have the expertise or funds to run their own servers. Therefore, they
use the easy option that teachers are familiar with: "free" online offerings from US big tech.
Network effects ensure deeper entrenchment. Big tech offers steep discounts for educational
licenses for these exact reasons.

Vocational schools focus on proprietary tech most used in industry. This goes beyond IT
studies. For example, statistics and psychology courses use SPSS over PSPP or R. Mathematics
and physics courses use Matlab over GNU Octave. Engineering courses use AutoCAD instead
of FreeCAD or LibreCAD.

A focus on the impact of tech choices in education could change the situation from the ground
up. In high school, there could be a place (e.g. in civic education class) to focus on the impact
of tech choices on society. This goes beyond domestic versus foreign "cloud" hosting and open
versus proprietary code. For example, studies show that social media can have harmful effects
on mental well-being, societal cohesion and even democracy.

How the EU can help:

   • Provide funding for course material, and/or create a certification programme for suitable
     course material to wean schools off of big tech software.
   • Start an education campaign aimed at the broader public in order to explain why closed
     software and the non-EU cloud are harmful. For example, it could focus on concrete
     issues that affect anyone like data protection, privacy and resistance against
     "enshittification" such as unwanted ads, price hikes and feature removal.
   • For the existing work force, the EU can fund training in open alternatives so that people
     feel confident with these alternatives. Such training should include a theoretical
     component to discuss the benefits of using open alternatives to ensure people are fully on
     board.

Existing FOSS companies and economic situation
The EU has plenty of FOSS businesses already. A handful of examples: SUSE was one of the
first companies to provide FOSS server and desktop operating systems for the enterprise. Tuta
and Protonmail provide innovative secure e-mail solutions. Nextcloud offers cloud-based
content collaboration tools. GitLab and Codeberg offer code hosting platforms.

These companies are innovative and profitable, but small in the global market place.
Competitors from the US benefit from economies of scale. The initial US market is a large
country with a single language and minimal legislation. This allows for quick domestic growth
followed by global expansion. The EU market is more fragmented so it is harder to gain a
foothold, requiring more up front investment to e.g. support the languages spoken in the EU.

Venture capital is also less likely to invest in the EU because of stricter legislation. Because
FOSS solutions give competing companies a chance to offer the product, the returns on
investment are lower than with proprietary software where a single company has a monopoly
on the software.

Some EU companies have realised that this legislation is an asset: it allows for differentiation
from US-based offerings. EU software can compete in the global market place on its own
merits.

How the EU can help:

   • Promote tech sovereignty to countries across the world. Start with countries who are not
     formally allied to the US. This could help EU companies to expand into the global
     market.
   • Help EU companies become more well-known by organising trade shows exhibiting only
     FOSS EU companies.
   • Provide funding to organisations like the FSF Europe to run awareness campaigns about
     FOSS alternatives.
   • Perhaps controversial: heavily tax proprietary, non-EU software or provide tax breaks for
     FOSS EU software to level the playing field.
   • Even more controversially, prevent foreign-owned companies from operating data centers
     in the EU. Make it as hard as possible for them to offer high-speed cloud software here.
     These data centers are already unpopular, as they use precious water and land, and they
     only make foreign companies more powerful.

Conclusion
The reasons for dependency on foreign proprietary solutions are systemic. The causes are
various: from inertia and ignorance to market effects and bribery. The solutions must be equally
systemic: from education to policy and funding, all points must be attacked in order to succeed.
This is the only way we can get rid of our dependency on non-EU software.