Ref. Ares(2026)1204106 - 03/02/2026

Towards European open digital ecosystems
This document is Inria’s answer to the call for evidence published by the European Commission.

Executive Summary
The current limits of European Union open source policy are less due to a lack of openness than to a
lack of explicit, assumed, and governed strategic choices.
Europe needs a strategic framework to better understand when open source should be used to
increase EU technological sovereignty, competitiveness and cybersecurity and what needs to be
done to maximize benefits when it is used .

Open source constitutes a lever for Europe, but it should not be considered as a neutral or automatic
policy. In a context of strong industrial, legal, and geopolitical asymmetries, non-targeted openness
can also produce counterproductive effects. The objective of any software policy in Europe must be
to strengthen the European software ecosystem, regardless of the publishing model.

Open source should be used to reduce these asymmetries as it reduces dependencies to non-
European and / or monopolistic Software providers and it levels the field by giving smaller actors a
solid technological base they can build on to challenge dominant actors. However, great care must
be given to ensure all organizations benefiting from this technological base have strategic
understanding, incentives and practical means to contribute to it maintenance and further
development. Some operational recommendations towards this are summarized at the end of the
document.

Main Recommendations
   •   European stakeholders must be made aware of the variety of forms of openness, know how
       to recognize contexts where open source, due to a lack of transparent and shared
       governance, conceals a form of capture, and know how to make use of the range of forms of
       openness (attribution clauses, sharing clauses, etc.).
   •   Funded R&I projects should be required to elaborate on the balance between the benefits of
       publishing their results as free Software and the risks that global actors capture most of their
       value and become the main beneficiaries and distributors, especially when no credible plans
       to maintain or further develop the software as an open source project are made. Promoting
       open science should not mean that all software developed in academia must be open source.
   •   Greater harmonisation across the EU, adoption of converging policies and approaches at the
       scale of UE members. By emphasising more harmonisation and providing consistent
       structured backing, more cohesive ecosystem that nurtures sustainable development and
       encourages collaboration will be created for high-quality projects. Standardising practices,
       formats and licences, and enhancing structured support for opensource initiatives, will foster
        the development of trustworthy software, will ensure their maintenance and boost their
        adoption.
    •   Plans should be made to support projects providing key software infrastructures that a wide
        array of applications or economic actors use as building blocks over integrated solutions.
    •   Sovereignty in the open source should encompass the digital infrastructure required to host
        the development of open source projects. Europe should identify ways of building and
        operating credible alternatives to github.com, gitlab.com. Data portability between such
        infrastructures should be promoted
    •   For sovereignty and cyber resilience, Europe should treat major software registries as critical
        infrastructure and plan EU-based resilient mirrors, backed by archives such as Software
        Heritage.
    •   For cybersecurity, Europe should promote SoftWare Hash IDentifiers (SWHID)1 as best
        practice for the description of open source components included in a Software Bill of
        Materials (SBOM2) under the CRA

1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open source sector?
What are the main obstacles that hamper (i) adoption and maintenance of
high-quality and secure open source; and (ii) sustainable contributions to
open source communities?

Strengths
The European open source sector has undeniable strengths:
    • a solid technical and scientific foundation, feeding many critical building blocks;
    • a culture of cooperation, interoperability, and standardization;
    • significant contribution to widely used global software infrastructures.
These strengths primarily revolve around the ability to produce and share code.

Weaknesses and obstacles
The obstacles are less about the intrinsic quality of the software than its strategic positioning:
   • structural asymmetry between a multitude of small European actors who produce open-
       source software, and global actors capable of industrializing, securing, and quickly capturing
       value;
   • chronic insufficiency of dedicated means for maintenance, security, and governance, which
       are determinant for real software quality;
   • a tendency to consider openness as an end in itself, leading to poorly informed decisions and
       difficult reversibility;
   • persistent difficulty in taking responsibility for differentiated choices about openness
       depending on sectors or nature of a Software.

1
  A SoftWare Hash IDentifier (SWHID) is an ISO-standardized, intrinsic, and persistent identifier that uniquely
references software source code artifacts by computing a cryptographic hash directly from their content.
2
  A Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) is a formal, machine-readable inventory that lists all components, libraries,and
dependencies within a software application to ensure supply chain transparency and security.
   •   Lack of open source culture among customers (public sector and businesses), who fail to
       understand that taking part in the collective effort is the cost-efficient strategy, and do not
       contribute enough to the health of the software eco-systems they come to rely on.

The absence of direct costs allows the use of free-licensed components without strategic thinking by
management, and therefore without institutional support for protecting the investment through
contribution to the health of the component used. This is a failure in manager training. Inria has seen
this play out for a number of software built by its research teams, used by some industrial actors, but
for which is is difficult to build and finance consortiums to maintain and develop the software
further than its research origins

There is great diversity in mechanisms supporting open source software: code contribution, other
contributions to the project around the software, purchase of services (support contract, specific
development), donation to non-profit organizations, membership in user associations or consortia,
tip to developers. Most are incompatible with public procurement regulations or the organization of
work within an administration. In the absence of acceptable procurement scoring criteria on the
respondents' contribution to the software they propose to use, public procurement regulations lead
to prioritizing contractualization with actors who use open source solutions while contributing
minimally to the health of the exploited commons, thus impoverishing communities. As a
generalization of this principle, any rules governing EU’s open source sector should favor actors who
contribute to digital commons increasing their overall value over those who only take advantage of
them and therefore build no further value.

2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private
sectors?
To understand the benefits of open source, one should make a distinction between open source
code and the open source communities around open source code. Using open source code gives
access to the code, independently from a vendor, provided a copy is hosted in a public archive.
When the code is maintained by an open community, this increases the sustainability of a codebase,
independently from a single vendor.

For the public sector, open source code can:
    • reduce certain technical dependencies (formats, interoperability);
    • ease the diffusion and sharing of the development costs non-differentiating building blocks;
    • improve transparency, provided there is real ability to understand and master, and thereby
       enable improvements in cybersecurity in particular;
    • enable the reduction of costs and delays associated with certain developments and the
       introduction of new approaches to public service development (agile methods, rapid
       iteration, data-driven strategies) for the benefit of users;
    • enable sharing of research results with the public (as per open science principles).

However, openness without open communities with clear stewardship and governance frequently
leads to increased dependency on service providers or dominant actors, nullifying expected benefits.

For the private sector, open source code is mainly:
   •   an accelerator of innovation;
   •   a means of reducing costs and technical risks.

In an asymmetric context, this value is primarily captured by actors with industrialization capabilities,
for example to make the Software accessible in a Software as a Service mode or as part of a larger
software suite, regardless of their contribution to commons.

3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at the EU level to
support the development and growth of the EU open source sector and
contribute to the EU’s technological sovereignty and cybersecurity agenda?

The most structured measure would be to recognize that open source requires explicit strategic
choices. This implies notably:
   • going beyond uniform support logic or sprinkling, to target actors, projects, or organizations
       capable of ensuring sustainable support; Priority should be given to projects providing key
       software infrastructures that a wide array of applications use as building blocks over
       integrated solutions
   • systematically integrating maintenance, security, and governance challenges into funding
       mechanisms; each time a funding mechanism allows for software license purchase, it must
       provide means for financing any open source software used.
   • forge new strategies for cooperation between Member States, respecting the diversity of
       their respective choices but nevertheless enabling them to share their analyses and codes,
       and ensuring that their solutions are interoperable
   • accepting that some trajectories involve delayed, partial, or conditional openness;
   • clarifying applicable rules to avoid supported solutions being subject to incompatible
       extraterritorial legislation with European sovereignty objectives. Solutions are for example
       subject to extraterritorial legislation when they are developed or distributed from non-
       European servers, where user accounts are subject to the law applicable to the provider.

Without this capacity to target and choose, EU action risks remaining dispersed, ineffective, and
possibly contrary to European technological sovereignty objectives.

One of the key actions for sovereignty would be to support the emergence of a forge operating
under European law. Collaboration around strategic digital commons for Europe cannot depend
exclusively on accounts and code hosting on github or gitlab.com. This should come as an additional
effort over support for Software Heritage, an infrastructure to ensure availability of code across time
that should be identified and supported as a key infrastructure for sovereignty.

4. What technology areas should be prioritized and why?
Technological domains should be viewed dynamically as they evolve regularly. It appears more
pertinent to reason in terms of the "roles" of software building blocks. Prioritized software building
blocks are those that:
    • guarantee sovereignty and democracy (such as digital public infrastructures, open data)
    • structure ecosystems (standards, interfaces, formats) -> cloud, networks, OS, ...
   •   condition the ability to master, audit, and evolve systems -> cyber, AI, quantum, ...

Some strongly differentiating or strategic building blocks in the same domains can legitimately follow
proprietary trajectories to preserve secrecy/IP -> quantum, cyber, ...

5. In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to increased
competitiveness and cyber resilience?
Increased open source usage leads to greater competitiveness and resilience if it is integrated into a
strategy to master all aspects:
    • understanding the building blocks used, identification of the most commonly used;
    • maintain and secure them over time;
    • not depend on extra-European legal or industrial frameworks.

This topic should be instructed sector by sector by considering Europe's advance or delay, the
existence or non-existence of European industrial actors, the transparency versus secrecy issue for
security questions (algorithms on public actions, explainability, bias identification, ...)

For cyber resilience, it is critical the Europe treats major software registries as critical infrastructure
and plan EU-based resilient mirrors, backed by Software Heritage archiving.

To understand the most commonly used by public institutions, usage of software bill of materials
(SBOM) should be generalized, at least for all services provided by public institutions.

Operational Recommendations
   •   Funding rules for R&I projects that allow software licenses as eligible costs should also allow
       support for open source developers and communities. This support should be encouraged
       when open source software is a key component of deliverables for the project, especially for
       specialized software such as scientific software
   •   Due to the diversity of funding mechanisms for open source projects, a standardized way for
       a community around an open source software to announce acceptable ways to send financial
       support should be admitted as a sufficient base for financial justifications. Some projects
       might prefer a donation based approach, others a consortium based approach, others a
       ranking mechanism to identify companies that work with the community, but all should be
       supported.
   •   Managers should be trained so as to identify open source software their companies have
       invested in, even as simple users, as an asset they need to identify and contribute to for
       continued availability
   •   Public institutions using open source software should be encouraged to publish a list of the
       software used, with an indication of its criticality, so as to help agencies tasked with
       identifying and supporting critical digital infrastructure fulfill their goals. This in turn will help
       identify de facto standards and the main stakeholders to work with to favor interoperability.
   •   Procurement for services built on open source software should favor structures who
       contribute to building the communities around that software, and not integrators who
       optimize costs by staying clear of contributions to the Software