Ref. Ares(2026)1178458 - 03/02/2026

                                                                            Drupal Association
                                                                     439 NE Sandy Blvd # 269
                                                                     Portland, OR, 97211 USA
                                                       info@association.drupal.org | Drupal.org

To: European Commission, DG CONNECT​
From: The Drupal Association​
Date: 3 February 2026​
Re: Call for Evidence on the European Open Digital Ecosystem Strategy

Dear Members of the European Commission,

The Drupal Association welcomes the opportunity to respond to the call for evidence on the
European Open Digital Ecosystem Strategy. As stewards of Drupal, one of the world's largest
open-source digital experience platforms powering hundreds of thousands of websites globally,
we bring 25 years of experience building and sustaining a thriving open-source community. We
represent an ecosystem that already powers a significant portion of European public sector,
NGO, and enterprise websites.

The European digital landscape currently stands at a crossroads. While Europe boasts one of
the world’s most active and talented open-source contributor bases, its digital infrastructure
remains heavily dependent on proprietary technologies, creating digital sovereignty risks. The
Drupal Association strongly supports the European Commission’s Call for Evidence on Open
Source Digital Ecosystems.

The European Commission has increasingly understood the power of public code for the public
good, and it's become clear that more often than not, Open Source solutions are the best
solutions for the European digital landscape. However, there have been gaps in the European
procurement strategy that must be closed to make the Open Source strategy fully sustainable
and to enable true digital sovereignty.

The key issue is that the current procurement process for most open source solutions (whether
in Europe or elsewhere around the world) focuses only on the software, and not on the open
source capabilities and credentials of the vendors competing for the procurement contract.
Unfortunately, all too often, we see contracts given to vendors who can implement open source,
but do not contribute back to the sustainability of the open source ecosystems they are
exploiting. In some cases, these same organisations are simply subcontracting back to the true
contributors in the ecosystem, at a reduced rate that drastically cuts the margins of the true
contributors and makes it difficult for them to allocate resources to contribution.
                                                                             Drupal Association
                                                                      439 NE Sandy Blvd # 269
                                                                      Portland, OR, 97211 USA
                                                        info@association.drupal.org | Drupal.org

Open source is not just software; it is a body of practice that applies to both non-profit and
for-profit entities, and their behaviour as open source citizens can be objectively measured and
should be built into procurement criteria.

In addition to requiring or giving a preferential option for open source software, we would
propose that future procurement processes be updated to include:
    ●​ Consultation with the independent stewards of these open source projects. In many
        cases, there are respected, independent non-profit organisations that certify vendors
        who use the software. For instance, the Drupal Association certifies agencies that meet
        contribution and quality standards under our Drupal Certified Partner program.
    ●​ Minimum standards for past contribution
    ●​ Standards requiring that relevant code developed during procurement projects be
        contributed back upstream.
    ●​ Requirements for ongoing contribution back to upstream projects
    ●​ We would also strongly recommend the inclusion of a pass-through provision that
        requires a portion of the contract value be passed back to any official governing entity for
        that open source project. For instance, the Drupal Association will only work with
        agencies or endorse products or services where there is a commitment to return 10% to
        the project.
    ●​ Disclosure of any subcontractors that would be employed, and their contribution history.

One way these specific mechanisms could be generalised to three principles in the procurement
process could be as follows:
   1.​ A Sovereign Score, which would require 20% of the scoring of bidding vendors to be
       allocated based on their contributions to the open source project.
   2.​ Open Source Maintenance Billing, allocating a portion of the contract hours for the
       procurement project specifically to reviewing and submitting patches, documentation,
       and other elements of upstream contribution.
   3.​ 30-Day Upstream rule, requiring that the vendors submit their open source code
       upstream within 30 days of completion.

There are more specific, objective tools that can be employed to systematise this process. In
the Drupal community, for example, there is a robust system of contribution recognition that is
attributed back to contributing organisations and weighted by impact on the project. Other
projects have or can implement similar tools. ​
​
Further reading:
     ●​ https://www.drupal.org/association/blog/how-to-write-an-rfp-for-open-source-solutions-fe
        aturing-drupal-certified-partners
                                                                           Drupal Association
                                                                    439 NE Sandy Blvd # 269
                                                                    Portland, OR, 97211 USA
                                                      info@association.drupal.org | Drupal.org

   ●​ https://dri.es/funding-open-source-for-digital-sovereignty
   ●​ https://dri.es/balancing-makers-and-takers-to-scale-and-sustain-open-source

The Drupal Association welcomes the opportunity to consult on contribution and sustainability in
open source.​
​
Best regards,

Tim Doyle​
Chief Executive Officer​
Drupal Association