Ref. Ares(2026)357876 - 14/01/2026

What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector?

Strengths:

    1. Vibrant and active Open Source communities with a pool of highly motivated and
       knowledgeable contributors, backed by viable Open Source companies in Europe. These
       are numerous, and can be can be build upon and expanded.

    2. Competitiveness and diversity spur innovation and are the breeding ground for a strong
       and vital digital economy, backed by vibrant cross-border Open Source communities.

    3. Interoperability of Open Source solutions make it easy to adjust and customize to
       individual requirements of organizations.

    4. Security: There are two main drivers behind the security benefits of open source, which
       align very well with European values.
       First is transparency. Open Source means the code is free to be inspected. This might seem
       to give attackers a benefit, but practice has shown that the ‘security through obscurity’
       approach in IT is ineffective and transparency results in less security issues. This is, in part,
       because ‘the good guys’ can find and report issues. But, as studies show, it is also because
       the transparency enforces a greater degree of discipline and improved work processes that
       result in higher quality code.
       Second is shared ownership. There are typically multiple parties involved in open source
       projects - one or more companies, home users, employees of other companies and so on.
       This brings in more creativity and innovation but also reduces the time to detect and fix
       problems - including security issues.
       The alignment of these with European values of transparency and shared ownership mean
       Europe has an inherent advantage in building and exploiting open source compared to
       more closed, authoritarian societies.

    5. Decentralization and resilience: As with security, the benefit of not relying on a single
       party contributes to more resilience of the ecosystem, as the disappearance of one player
       won’t take down the entire project. Combined with the typically greater and easier
       interoperability further reduces strategic reliance and thus helps improve the resilience of
       critical infrastructure.

    6. Peer-to-peer learning: Transparency and trust are two of the key pillars of Open Source
       development. Learning with and from each other in a community of like-minded peers
       helps cater for a safe and supervised, resilient infrastructure that also makes it easier for
       new users to migrate their systems and look for answers for potential challenges ahead.

    7. Public money, public code: Funding open source projects and buying European Open
       Source solutions mean the taxpayers money stays in Europe and invest in new projects to
       expand our digital ecosystem. Furthermore, the money is spent on solutions that benefit
       everyone.

Weaknesses:

    1. Lack of commercial drive: Motivation in European Open Source communities is often
       based on values, and less commercially driven than in the US, which makes it less visible
       and harder to maintain

    2. Reputation and public perception: To this day, Open Source projects are often regarded as
       the nerdy product that is not stable, capable, and scalable enough, let alone secure and
       even lacks usability. Setting standards and adopting open source solution can help clean up
       those false notions, and help make the benefits of Open Source more visible.

    3. Lack of sustainability: Open Source projects often suffer from inadequate investment, like
       donations and short-term subsidies. However, a sustainable business model should draw
       from a wide range of revenue sources, including both stable public funding as well as
       private investments.

    4. Lack of preparedness and visibility: Applying for certifications or ensuring regulatory
       compliance is more challenging for open source companies as this has not been looked into
       much. Authorities are prepared for propietary software but open source seems to be an
       afterthought if any.

What are the main barriers that hamper (i) adoption and maintenance of high-quality and
secure open source; and (ii) sustainable contributions to open-source communities?

    1. Anti-competitive behavior of Big Tech: Bundling of products, thwarting interoperability,
       and locking customers in for a sense of false convenience (at the cost of sacrificing your
       privacy)

    2. Complex procurement: As outlined above, the processes around procurement are often
       too complex and next to impossible for SMEs to take part in. The public sector also ‘aligns’
       with the bundling of Big Tech, that is, they often procure bundles that precisely follow the
       offerings of Big Tech, excluding SMEs that offer partial solutions. Of course there can be
       legitimate reasons to procure bundled services but these also increase dependencies and
       vendor lock-in risks. For example, a cloud solution for file sharing should not be tied to a
       specific cloud hosting vendor. The ability to host a solution anywhere gives great
       opportunities for cost savings and reduces dependencies. Yet every tender demands a
       combined hosting and software solution.

    3. Lack of effort to diversify: Often no effort whatsoever is expended investigating the markt
       options and evaluating other solutions than the most dominant Big Tech products. And if
       such efforts are put in, it is usually with the implied goal to simply justify picking the Big
       Tech solution. For example, by demanding highly specific and often small features to be
       available. And without talking to the vendor if these could be implemented on short notice,
       these become blockers.

    4. Lack of strategic purchasing and industrial policy in the public sector: National
       governments rarely if ever use their massive market power to improve the market or
       encourage European companies to develop alternatives. Rather, they only strengthen the
       dominance of Big Tech by actively preferring their solutions over local technology.

    5. Fear: IT management steers clear from alternatives from Big Tech, going out of their way to
       pick ‘safe’, established solutions even if there are viable local vendors. “Nobody ever got
       fired for buying IBM” seems to be the cause. This might be due to difficulties with
       interoperability and migration, which the Big Tech firms make intentionally hard.
       Moreover, the (perceived) cost of training and the unwillingness of employees to work with
       different technologies make it harder to move away from proprietary SaaS solutions.

    6. Higher demands put on open source vendors than proprietary vendors. Where, for
       example, a purchasing department seems to be entirely comfortable with using Microsoft
       SaaS solutions despite the dependency issues, legal and trade risks, a local Open Source
       vendor will be put under extreme scrutiny to avoid ‘depending on a single vendor’.
       Licenses, development practices and privacy policies are extensively vetted. This is
       stunning, given the enormous gap in dependence between running Open Source Software
       from a local vendor on own infrastructure versus relying on a proprietary SaaS service
       under US jurisdiction. Suddenly even a support contract with a local vendor for fully Open
       Source Software that is otherwise entirely hosted in-house is suspect, despite the current
       situation being one where a foreign company can entirely shut down the service for any
       reason whatsoever and at any time.

What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors? Please provide
concrete examples, including the factors (such as cost, risk, lock-in, security, innovation, among
others) that are most important to assess the added value.

Open Source is the only solution if Europe wants to have any kind of serious, value-adding IT
industry and any degree of technological independence from US Big Tech. Some examples:

    • Local open source firms bring high added-value development jobs, while foreign Big Tech
      firms do most development in either the USA or off-shored in cheap low-cost countries,
      and within Europe they mostly hire sales, marketing and local support people.

    • Open Source solutions can be adapted to the customers needs, are often designed to run
      locally and tend to be far more flexible. This not only gives increased benefit to the
      customers but also generates much higher paid jobs at the companies that use that
      software.

    • Due to the reduced vendor lock-in and open, collaborative development processes, Open
       Source solutions tend to align better with the needs of customers, not abandoning features
       that customers want or adding anti-features like reducing the features of on-premises
       servers to push customers to the cloud like Microsoft is currently doing with Microsoft
       Exchange. The decoupling of software versus hosting service also increases competition
       and reduces costs.

    • The open innovation model of Open Source accelerates innovation and could be a huge
      driver for Europe, once we stop the foreign proprietary tech firms from smothering or
      buying the innovative firms.

Overall the risks are much lower on so many levels:

    • GDPR compliance

    • full control over data

    • full control over user accounts and the technology itself

    • high security due to transparent maintenance in and from the community with quicker bug
      fixes and security patches

What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support the development and
growth of the EU open-source sector and contribute to the EU’s technological sovereignty and
cybersecurity agenda?

Regulatory measures:

a) Effective enforcement of EU laws like GDPR, DSA, and DMA: Mere fines are not enough, as
paying those sums take too long (if at all in the end) and do not affect big corporations who have
budgeted this into their financial planning.

Furthermore, Big tech must be prevented from buying rising competitors to thwart competition.

b) Changes to public procurement:

    • Buy European preference: When there is one or more European solution available for the
      requirement, a European solution should be preferred over a non-European one.
      Establishing concrete definitions of what constitutes a European company supports such
      efforts, such as paying the majority of taxes in the EU and having a registered office and HQ
      in Europe, being founded in the EU and under European law etc. so that taxes and
      revenues can be used to reinvest in innovation and a thriving digital ecosystem in Europe.

       It should further be considered to divide the tender requirements and put it on offer for
       different providers when it is clear that a fraction of the requirements cannot be delivered
       from European providers. So instead of handing it then over to one single non-European
       provider, the playing field for SME is more leveled and caters for improved competition and
       higher security.

    • Strengthening the demand side: Public administrations should be role models and migrate
      to European open source solutions, hereby demonstrating its scalability, security, and
      capabilities as well as the government’s trust in our own European solutions.

    • Cutting red tape: The processes are currently so complex it is hard to follow through,
      especially for smaller municipalities. Hence for convenience and risk aversion reasons, the
      requirements and criteria don’t change which results in preventing other providers from
      taking part in the first place. It is also very difficult to take part as bidding consortia across
      countries.

    • Unbundle services: stop implicitly or explicitly aligning with the bundles that proprietary
      vendors offer. Demand a separate file sharing solution, independent from hosting. Demand
      a separate office suite, suitable for any operating system. Buy hardware that is not only
      working with a single vendors’ operating system. And so on.

    2. Challenges of the internal market:

a) Buying and selling to other countries in the EU is extremely difficult and needs to be simplified
in order to speed up innovations and make Europe an attractive place to found new businesses.

b) The same goes for hiring which is equally challenging across European borders. This is not just a
problem for companies, but it also negatively impacts the respective labor markets and once
again, hinders innovation when you cannot build enough diversity across your teams as planned.

All this can be accomplished without any addtional funds, as the millions (of tax money) that is
currently spend for Non-European solutions, could be used to re-invest within Europe, to enhance
Open Source ecosystems and avoid the brain drain.

What technology areas should be prioritised and why?

70% of the effort should go into those solutions that are already available and are hence easy to
migrate. Again, this will support Europe's IT sector as massive spending that currently goes to
foreign companies gets redirected to the EU, enabling our innovators to start building and
expanding capabilities.

30% of the effort should go into fixing the most critical strategic dependency challenges Europe
face - critical services around self defense, health care and core infrastructure.

In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to increased competitiveness and
cyber resilience?

see above