Ref. Ares(2026)1217920 - 03/02/2026

Numeum contribution to the European
Commission Call for Evidence on Open Digital
Ecosystems
Executive summary
The European Commission aims to boost European technological sovereignty by
leveraging open-source technologies. Building on its 2020–2023 Open Source Software
Strategy, the Commission plans to strengthen support for open digital ecosystems
through a new strategic approach. While Europe benefits from a strong and mature open-
source ecosystem, it still lacks a comprehensive industrial policy to support the
development and adoption of open-source technologies across governments and
companies.

The potential of open-source to boost competitiveness and reduce dependencies is
widely recognised. Leveraging open-source technologies therefore appears to be a key
asset for the EU’s global digital and innovation strategy.

Numeum represents 2,500 digital companies in France, from start-ups and SMEs to large
industrial and services groups. Many of our members in the service and the software
industry are open-source players. Their input is highly valuable in identifying key barriers
and developing strategic recommendations supporting open-source development and
adoption across Europe.

Numeum welcomes the Commission’s initiative and recognises the importance of
setting a new open-source strategy. Numeum stands ready to support European
institutions in further discussions and in contributing to the development of this strategy.
Our Contribution
1) Strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-
source sector
The European Union benefits from a strong and mature open-source ecosystem, with
18.5 million contributors representing 15.4% of the global total 1. In terms of adoption,
open-source components are part of all technological frameworks, and open-source
technologies are used by almost all organisations: in France, nine out of ten public
organisations and eight out of ten private companies rely on open-source technologies2.
The total estimated value of publicly available open-source code is €8.8 trillion3,
generating between €65 and €95 billion annually for EU GDP. A 10% increase in
contributions could generate up to €100 billion in additional economic growth4.

Despite these strengths, the European open-source ecosystem faces structural
weaknesses that threaten its long-term sustainability.

    (i)      Key barriers to adoption, maintenance and secure use

Limited visibility and understanding.

    •     Many companies and public administrations still lack a clear understanding of
          open-source solutions, their governance models, and the role of integrators and
          service providers. This knowledge gap often leads decision-makers to favour well-
          known proprietary solutions, even when open-source alternatives are technically
          and economically superior.

Insufficient long-term funding for open-source components.

    •     Although open-source is widely used and delivers significant economic value, it
          remains under-recognised as a strategic asset among public and private actors,
          often leading to underinvestment and insufficient support.

Contribution limited to a small number of actors

    •     While public and private organisations are major consumers of open-source
          software, only a limited number actively contribute to its development. As a

1
  The Value of Open-source Software, Harvard Business School (2024)
2
  Open-source Monitor France, Markess-CNLL-Numeum-Systematic Report (2023)
3
  The Value of Open-source Software, Harvard Business School (2024)
4
  Study about the impact of open-source software and hardware on technological independence, competitiveness and
innovation in the EU economy, European Commission (2021)

                                                                                                              2
          result, many critical components depend on a small group of maintainers,
          creating risks related to sustainability, security, and long-term resilience.
          Consuming open-source without contributing back is unsustainable in the long
          term, creates structural dependencies and limits Europe’s ability to influence
          project roadmaps that are critical to its digital infrastructure.

   (ii)       Barriers to sustainable contributions

Lack of effective public policies and incentives

   •      Open-source contributions should be considered a strategic investment.
          European public administrations and companies should actively contribute to the
          open-source projects that are critical to their technical infrastructure.

Insufficient integration of open-source in education and training

   •      Open-source is still inadequately covered in computer science and engineering
          curricula. As a result, skill levels are uneven, and many graduates lack the
          practical knowledge required to work on or contribute to open-source
          infrastructures such as Linux or core middleware components.

Regulatory uncertainty.

   •      Certain regulatory frameworks, particularly those related to liability, are not well
          adapted to the collaborative and decentralised nature of open-source
          development. This uncertainty can discourage voluntary contributions, especially
          when code is co-developed and redistributed by diverse actors without traditional
          contractual relationships.

2) Added value of open source for the public
and private sectors
Open-source refers to a legal framework for software development based on access to
source code and licensing schemes that allow any holder of a copy of the software the
rights to use, modify, and redistribute the work. Open-source is generally associated with
an open, collaborative, and decentralized development model. Open-source delivers
significant added value across multiple dimensions:

Cost efficiency, competition and reduced lock-in:

   •      Open-source mitigates dependency on single vendors and reduces lock-in risks.
          By enabling portability and interoperability, it strengthens competition among
          suppliers, lowers switching costs, and protects organisations from unilateral
          pricing or contractual changes.

                                                                                            3
Security, transparency and trust:

   •   The open and auditable nature of open-source code enables thorough security
       assessments, including by cybersecurity authorities when required.
          o For example: transparency regarding code, contributors and development
             processes enhances trust and facilitates compliance with cybersecurity
             and regulatory frameworks (e.g. the use of SBOMs for CRA compliance).

Innovation and agility

   •   Open-source accelerates innovation by enabling the reuse of existing
       components, the mutualisation of development efforts and rapid
       experimentation. Organisations can focus their resources on high value-added
       use cases rather than rebuilding foundational technologies.
          o For example: in AI, open-source models enable fine-tuning, reuse and
             adaptation to specific cultural, linguistic or sectoral contexts without
             retraining models from scratch. Thus, open-source is also a way to favour
             frugal innovation using frameworks and models that have already been
             developed or trained.
          o For example: in the automotive sector, particularly in Software-Defined
             Vehicles, open-source components enable manufacturers to build
             shared, non-differentiating layers, while focusing their resources on high
             value-added services.

Accessibility

   •   Open-source solutions often include accessibility features developed by
       contributors or enable their development. As such, open source is an essential
       resource for people with specific accessibility needs.
          o For example: LibreOffice offers several APIs, such as the Java Accessibility
              API (JAA) and the UNO Accessibility API (UAA) delivering accessibility
              features.

3) Concrete EU-level measures to support the
open-source ecosystem
A coherent and ambitious EU strategy is required to fully leverage open-source for
technological sovereignty and cybersecurity.

                                                                                      4
Establish a European industrial policy for open-source

   •   Recognise open-source as a strategic industrial asset for Europe’s technological
       competitiveness and strategic autonomy.

   •   Shift from a consumption-based approach to a contribution-based strategy, in
       which public funding and procurement actively support upstream contributions.

   •   Preserve a global support for open-source without restricting policies based on
       geographical location, ensuring Europe benefits from the €8.8 trillion global value
       of open-source rather than creating silos.
           o True strategic autonomy is defined by digital agency i.e., the right to
              inspect, modify and exit rather than the geographic origin of the code.

   •   Establish coordinated and structured interactions with the leading global open-
       source foundations and organisations hosting open-source projects.

   •   Harmonise the Single Market for open-source services by removing cross-border
       administrative friction so that European SMEs can scale service-based business
       models across all 27 Member States.
          o It involves improving public sector understanding of open-source
             governance and intellectual property models as well as promoting
             international recognition of open-source standards and certifications
             (e.g., Common Criteria).

Support communities in maintaining critical components

   •   Identify and support critical open-source components used in European public
       and private infrastructures.

   •   Provide long-term funding mechanisms to ensure continuous contribution,
       maintenance, security updates and effective governance.

   •   Build on and scale existing initiatives aimed at auditing and securing open-source
       software used by public institutions.
          o European and national cybersecurity agencies should collaborate with the
              open-source ecosystem to audit and secure core open-source
              components. France has been leading the way with ANSSI closely working
              with some open-source providers.

                                                                                        5
Incentivise contributions by administrations and companies

    •   Support and invest in the creation of OSPOs (Open-source Program Offices5) in
        public administrations and large industries to structure open-source governance,
        strengthen contributions and maximize long-term strategic value.

    •   Enable and encourage public servants to contribute to open-source communities
        as part of their professional activities.

    •   Introduce fiscal incentives for private companies contributing to open-source
        projects.

    •   Develop clear governance and coordination structures at EU level, involving
        research institutions, administrations and industry.

Leverage public data and research

    •   Reinforce open data policies specifically for sectorial and theme-specific
        datasets.
           o Public research acts as a key factor in constituting niche datasets that are
               high value for companies (these datasets are notably useful in the field of
               AI). Support to public research in this area should be increased.

Education and skills

    •   Make open source a core component of computer science and engineering
        curricula in public education.

    •   Support continuous professional training on open-source development, security
        and community governance.

    •   Promote awareness-raising and trainings on open-source for non-technical
        profiles (e.g. lawyers that have to understand open-source licence)

Regulatory and standardisation alignment

    •   Ensure that EU regulations (cybersecurity, AI, liability) take into account the
        specificities of open-source in order to avoid discouraging voluntary
        contributions.
           o For example, the Cyber Resilience Act (CRA) still fails to adequately
               address the specific characteristics of open source. Although liability
               applies only to open-source products provided through commercial

5
 An Open-source Program Office (OSPO) is a dedicated internal unit within an organisation (public or
private) that coordinates, governs and scales open-source activities.

                                                                                                       6
              activities, this distinction does not reflect well the realities of open-source
              development and distribution i.e. could donations exceeding development
              costs be considered a commercial activity? Moreover, the CRA, initially
              designed for physical products, struggles to apply to open-source digital
              good: does each copy of a piece of software constitute a distinct product
              placed on the market, or does a “child” copy inherit the market placement
              date of the “master” copy?

   •   Promote open-source solutions as reference implementations for European
       standards and interoperability frameworks.

   •   Favour the integration of open-source experts and open-source foundations into
       standardisation bodies such as CEN-CENELEC and ETSI to ensure that European
       standards are compatible with open-source licences and principles.

Public Procurement
   •   Promote open-source in public procurement especially for critical infrastructure
       in order to reduce dependencies and favour the development of European open-
       source suppliers.

   •   Clarify open-source software warranties in public procurement by proposing a
       Shared Responsibility framework: product warranties are not compatible with
       community-provided open-source code and create a structural barrier to its
       adoption in public procurement. However, maintenance and support services
       (SLAs) can be provided by companies with a dedicated contract.

4) Priority technology areas
Open-source should be supported across all technology domains due to the benefits it
can bring to the European digital and innovation ecosystem. However, two areas require
particular attention.

Artificial Intelligence: open-source AI is essential to foster innovation, competitiveness
and reduce dependencies.
   • Priority should be given to supporting the development of open-source AI: this
        includes open-source datasets for training models, open-source models, training
        and inference and software.
   • Moreover, open-source AI favours auditability which is essential for ensuring
        trusted adoption in critical infrastructure.

                                                                                           7
Cloud and edge computing: support open-source cloud and edge infrastructure is
essential to reduce Europe digital dependencies.
   • Europe needs an open-source stack including virtualisation, operating systems
      and orchestration, to manage massive edge-to-cloud data safely and
      independently.

5) Sectors with the highest potential impact
Open source, generally speaking, leads to increased competitiveness and cyber
resilience. Its adoption should therefore benefit all sectors. However, four sectors could
benefit the most under the framework of the next strategy.

Public sector
   • Public institutions benefit from using open-source solutions that reduce
       dependency. Moreover, the public sector can lead by example, using public
       procurement to encourage the broad adoption of open-source solution and
       helping the business-development of open-source actors.

Critical infrastructures
    • Open source is crucial for reducing dependencies and ensuring transparency,
       thereby enhancing global security and resilience.

SMEs and startups
  • Open-source lowers barriers to entry, reduces development costs, and
      accelerates innovation.

Mobility and automotive
  • The transition to Software-Defined Vehicles requires massive amounts of code.
       Sharing non-differentiating open-source software stacks accelerate innovation
       and reduces costs for European manufacturers facing global competition.

                                                                                        8