Ref. Ares(2026)1224377 - 03/02/2026

             Call for evidence - European Open Digital Ecosystem Strategy

                                 Scaleway’s contribution

                                             ***

Scaleway is a leading European cloud provider, subsidiary of the iliad Group, offering a fully
sovereign and widely recognized portfolio, including:

   ●   public cloud PaaS and IaaS products, making it the best European alternative to
       Amazon’s AWS or Google’s GCP. Scaleway was the first CSP to provide true public
       cloud services, and still offers the most comprehensive catalogue of products of any
       European CSP ;
   ●   A extensive AI platform: Scaleway deployed the very first large scale H100 cluster in
       Europe in 2023. It now provides large-scale GPU clusters (several thousands of
       NVIDIA H100s interconnected, currently up-and-running, and brand new NVIDIA
       B300), Inference as a Service, and of course GPU-as-a-Service (GPUaaS) – what
       currently people call neo-clouds.

Scaleway is deeply rooted in the open source ecosystem and we firmly believe that open
source is the way for Europe to defend and work towards European sovereign technology,
from infrastructure to software.

Open source is an essential ingredient for European sovereignty. Open source is
beneficial in several ways:

   ●   transparency, by allowing code auditing and avoiding the black box phenomenon
   ●   reversibility, by supporting strategic autonomy and
   ●   by enabling the development of a value chain: this allows for the retention of
       economic value and technical know-how on European soil, rather than simply
       consuming packaged services from the United States or China.

However, as the Commission points out, free software alone is not enough, and a large part
of its value is currently captured by tech giants outside the EU.

Open source is not a magic bullet: the use of open solutions must be complemented by
controlled infrastructure and high-level skills capable of maintaining and modifying projects.
For example, in the cloud sector, there is a difference between using a "copy-paste" open
source stack and reusing components of open source projects by adapting, customizing, and
tailoring them to one's needs. Open source is not necessarily "plug-and-play" and does not
dispense with specialized technical skills.

Open source must be supported at all levels of the value chain: open source must be
supported at the level of development forges, cloud infrastructures and platforms, as
well as hardware, with projects like Open Compute or Risc-V.

                                             ***
1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector? What are
the main barriers that hamper (i) adoption and maintenance of high-quality and secure
open source; and (ii) sustainable contributions to open-source communities?

Europe boasts a deep and successful history in Open Source, consistently developing world-
class solutions that are adopted globally across diverse industries and sectors. In addition,
open source is a highly resource-efficient model, primarily due to its high reusability. The
pooling of resources inherent in the model benefits all participants, leading to more
affordable solutions for the general public. Instead of repeatedly redeveloping identical
solutions, organizations can reuse existing code, extending and improving it to meet their
specific needs.

Despite these merits, the adoption of secure, high-quality open source is hindered by several
structural and cultural factors:

   -   Legacy Procurement Biases: Many public procurement templates are designed for
       proprietary software, requiring financial track records (e.g., "three years in business")
       that open-source projects cannot provide.
   -   Inertia of "Proprietary Habits": Organizations often renew existing dependencies out
       of ease, failing to account for long-term benefits like interoperability and digital
       sovereignty.

2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors? Please
provide concrete examples, including the factors (such as cost, risk, lock-in, security,
innovation, among others) that are most important to assess the added value.

Open source increases transparency, which enhances security and builds trust. Users can
switch solutions and providers, effectively avoiding vendor lock-in, and gain real ownership
over the solution and the surrounding knowledge, ensuring adoption does not submit them to
the will of the provider. A significant benefit is the potential to redirect profits currently
generated in the EU by major, US-based tech companies back into the European economy,
supporting local businesses and public institutions. Starting from a common, shared
resource base accelerates the development of products and services, and the cost is greatly
reduced since solutions do not need to be re-developed multiple times.

For example, Open Hardware (Open HW) offers significant long-term benefits, including
reduced capital and operational expenditures (CAPEX and OPEX), greater component reuse
across product generations, and improved energy efficiency through optimized power
delivery such as direct current (DC) and fewer power supply units (PSUs). The evolution of
Open Rack v3 has enabled better power and cooling capabilities, making it increasingly
suitable for AI workloads. Additionally, working directly with Taiwanese ODMs (e.g.,
Gigabyte, ASRock Rack, MSI) allows companies like Scaleway to define precise technical
specifications and drive customized implementations. However, initial CAPEX for Open Rack
systems can be higher, and the lack of European manufacturing infrastructure leads to
reliance on US or Asian suppliers, often with high minimum order quantities (MOQs) and
limited access to evaluation samples. Despite growing interest, the European Open
Hardware and firmware ecosystem remains underdeveloped compared to the US and Asia.
There are no European champions in key areas such as chassis, mechanical design, or core
components.
3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support the
development and growth of the EU open-source sector and contribute to the EU’s
technological sovereignty and cybersecurity agenda?

To support the growth of the EU open-source sector and enhance technological sovereignty,
the EU may implement the following measures:

A. Leverage Public Procurement as a Strategic Driver

The Commission should align "Buy European" with "Buy Open Source" initiatives. Public
procurement must support open-source solutions or those built on open-source foundations
to reduce external dependencies. The European Commission and Parliament should lead by
example by adopting open-source software and phasing out non-European, non-open
proprietary solutions.

B. Strengthen sovereign infrastructure and funding

Technological sovereignty requires European control over the entire value chain, including
hosting and maintenance. For example, EU may establish a dedicated fund to support the
long-term maintenance of critical open-source infrastructure. EU also should support a large-
scale hosting infrastructure (Forge) in partnership with existing ecosystems like
Forgejo/Codeberg alongside european cloud service providers. This transforms hosting into
a European public service, ensuring critical code is not dependent on non-transparent third-
country platforms.

C. Economic and Fiscal Incentives

Financial mechanisms are needed to overcome the inertia of proprietary legacy systems. EU
should implement fiscal mechanisms that favor organizations using, developing, or
contributing to open-source initiatives. The benefit of public grants should also be conditional
on use of reliable, open, and verifiable foundations to ensure long-term resilience.

D. Education and Skills Development

Sovereignty is impossible without a skilled workforce capable of maintaining and governing
open ecosystems. It starts with education, by raising awareness on open-source
environments as early as possible by integrating these technologies into standard
educational curricula.

E. Supporting open-source as a means of continuum between public research and the private
sector

The Commission supports R&D through several programs, for example Horizon 2030, or the
RAISE program (Resource for AI Science in Europe, part of the European Strategy for Artificial
Intelligence (AI) in Science. Nevertheless, the schemes are sometimes poorly visible and
dispersed among a myriad of actors. It would be necessary to strengthen the impact and
concentrate the support on a few key initiatives, such as Kyutai, an independent non-profit
open-science research laboratory financed by Xavier Niel (iliad), Rodolphe Saadé (CMA-
CGM) and Eric Schmidt (former CEO, Google).

Indeed, exchanges between the public and private sectors must be encouraged to support our
competitiveness and innovation. Too often in Europe we struggle to move from our
outstanding number of researchers to successful companies. In AI, open source offers a
compelling path for rapid AI adoption, providing benefits for companies such as lower costs,
easy model fine-tuning, and data control through hosting on sovereign infrastructures. It builds
trust in the technology that can be easily audited, and it is more dependable than black-box
APIs for companies to grow their use cases on and create value. It will also help attracting
talents; researchers love to publish open-source.