European
Open Source                                                                                                                                                           MENU
AI Index

                                                                                                                                                            Ref. Ares(2026)211656 - 09/01/2026

                            A European Open Source AI Definition

                                In Europe, everyone developing and deploying open-source generative AI
                                systems must navigate two challenges: some of the strictest personal data
                                protection laws (in the form of the GDPR or its derivatives in the UK and
                                Switzerland) and unclear regulation regarding open-source AI systems
                                (e.g., underspecified use of the term 'open-source' in the EU AI Act and the
                                Cybersecurity Act).

                                To make matters worse, Europe—unlike the US and China—does not have a
                                definition of open-source AI that is aligned with its own laws. This
                                confusing regulatory landscape stands in sharp contrast to the significant
                                contributions that organizations in Europe make to the open-source AI
                                ecosystem. A recent example of this is the Swiss AI Initiative's "Apertus"
                                model series, which achieved an outstanding degree of openness.

                                It is high time to simplify our regulation of open-source AI and come up with
                                a future-proof definition that underpins existing law. Here, we recap current
                                definitions of open-source (generative) AI and propose a European Open
                                Source AI definition that is GDPR-aligned and uniquely European.

                                Current definitions and European regulation

                                As of early 2026, European open-source AI model builders and providers
                                are still left in legal limbo. While open-source AI is explicitly mentioned in
                                legal frameworks such as the EU AI Act and the Cybersecurity Act, a key
                                unresolved issue is whether open data is part of open-source AI.

                                Two definitions have been proposed so far—one in China and one in the US
                                —but neither fits the European context:

                                China: The Open Atom Foundation has published legal documents clarifying
                                that in China, open-source AI refers only to model weights; open data is not
                                included.

                                The US The Open Source Initiative OSI has published the "Open Source
                                AI Definition 1.0." In a nutshell, it encourages open data as part of open-
                                source AI but allows private, non-open-source-licensed data to be used in
                                open-source models.

                                The European Union's AI Office has yet to clarify which definition of open-
                                source AI applies to us. Is Europe better off charting its own way forward?

                                Distinct from both the US and China, Europe has some of the strictest
                                privacy and data protection regulations in the form of the General Data
                                Protection Regulation GDPR. If these uniquely European achievements are
                                to be carried over into the age of (open-source) AI, the only working
                                approach to open and transparent AI models is to comprehensively share
                                training data that is both appropriately open-source licensed and open for
                                inspection for GDPR compliance.

                                At its core, the matter is simple: the only way to ensure all eight core rights
                                of people in Europe are granted is through complete data transparency.1

        Feature             Open Weight                     OSAI in China                   OSAI in the US                        European Open Source AI

        Defined by                                          Open Atom Foundation            Open Source Initiative                EU AI Office?

        Model Weights       Released                        Released                        Released                              Released

        Training Code       Not Shared                      Fully Shared                    Fully Shared                          Fully Shared

        Training Pipeline   Withheld                        Nice to have                    Nice to have                          Fully Shared

        Training Data       Not Shared/Not disclosed        Not Shared/Not disclosed        Encouraged Closed allowed)           Fully shared

        Data Composition    Partially/Not Disclosed         Fully Disclosed                 Fully Disclosed                       Fully Disclosed

                                A definition fit for Europe

                                A European open-source definition must be designed for maximal simplicity
                                and GDPR alignment, serving as a guardrail for innovative technology of and
                                for the public. This principle harkens back to the beginning of the open-
                                source movement, when core pieces of complex personal computer
                                technology Unix kernels) were freed from the shackles of monopolized
                                proprietary ownership and made freely available to everyone (for more, see
                                Open Sources). Europe is currently the most promising place to carry this
                                spirit over into the era of AI.

                                The European Open Source AI definition builds upon the work of the Open
                                Source Initiative OSI, which published a US-centered definition in 2024
                                the Open Source AI Definition 1.0 OSAID 1.0. For Europe, a simplified
                                version of OSAID 1.0 is needed—one that takes a clear stand on an issue
                                that has proven divisive within the open-source AI community: the full
                                release of model training data.

                                The OSAID 1.0 takes an ambiguous position regarding whether open data is
                                required for open-source AI. The definition encourages open data while
                                allowing training data to be withheld under certain conditions. To make this
                                work, training data is broken down into four types, with different
                                requirements for whether data must be shared, documented, or kept under
                                wraps (as in the case of "privately-held, unsharable data"—see the OSAID
                                FAQ for more detail).

                                In the US context of an AI landscape dominated by private firms, this makes
                                sense. As a result, the OSI opted for a definition "supported by diverse
                                stakeholders", including private corporations and "cannot be an empty set".
                                In comparison, Europe features many publicly funded organizations and a
                                strong public sector that actively develops open-source AI using public
                                data. Our open-source definition must be designed for them. Given GDPR
                                requirements, private or unsharable data has no place in open-source AI
                                systems here. It is simple: In Europe, open-source AI is public AI.

                                Path towards distincly European AI

                                The European Open Source AI defintion differs from its counterparts in the
                                US and China, setting Europe on a distinct path:

                                It is simple. A clear and simple boundary between open-weight AI and
                                open-source AI is drawn. Open-source AI means full open-data AI. Only
                                models meeting this high standard warrant true open-source status. If data
                                cannot be shared, call it open-weight.

                                It enables GDPR alignment. Meeting the highest openness and
                                transparency standards is the only way to enable compliance with the
                                continent's outstanding data protection standards. In fact, uniquely high
                                standards for privacy and data protection offer a competitive edge,
                                positioning European AI at the forefront of open-source model
                                development.

                                It actually supports innovation. Despite what open-weight model providers
                                often claim, only open-source AI actually delivers innovation. Organisations
                                in Europe and beyond (e.g. The Swiss AI Inititave, Allen Institute for AI
                                demonstrate the public benefits of open-source AI.

                                The European open-source AI definition is designed to include only true
                                open-source AI technology, safeguarding against open-washing. Its legal
                                adoption protects the many, often small, organisations that already deliver
                                top open models.

                                Join the discussion on Codeberg. Make you voice heard at the European AI
                                Office.

                                More on European open-source AI and AI-ready data in the EU

                             European Data Union Strategy

                             Digital Commons European Digital Infrastructure Consortium DCEDIC

                             Open Future AI commons report

                                                                       Footnotes

                             This stance has seen increasing support in the form of court rulings that
                               clarify the relationship between generative AI model output and other forms
                               of (training) data, see GEMA vs OpenAI Nov 2025. ↩

                                  Supported by the Centre for Language Studies and the Dutch Research Council. Website design &
                                   development © 2024 by BSTN. This version of the index generated 26 December 2025, website
                                                              content last updated 30 December 2025.