Ref. Ares(2026)280827 - 12/01/2026

European Open Digital Ecosystem

 1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector? What are the main
 barriers that hamper (i) adoption and maintenance of high-quality and secure open source; and
 (ii) sustainable contributions to open-source communities?
 2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors? Please provide
 concrete examples, including the factors (such as cost, risk, lock-in, security, innovation, among
 others) that are most important to assess the added value.

The strategic map concerning 'added value' opportunities was well described in
the previous 2020-2023 strategy of the European Commission and there is not
so much to add there except that the urgency to take action has been raised with
the Draghi and Letta reports, geopolitical uncertainty and the increased
importance of digital sovereignty. One could streamline the new strategy based
on that analysis, ensuring a more long-term consistent view. The focus has
shifted from open source ecosystems themselves to using open source as a
leverage to advance broader policy goals, such as digital sovereignty and
strengthening the European Union's position on the global digital stage. The
2020-2023 Strategy [C(2020) 7149 final] is still spot on:

Open source impacts the digital autonomy of Europe. Against the hyper-scalers in the cloud, it is
likely that open source can give Europe a chance to create and maintain its own, independent digital
approach and stay in control of its processes, its information and its technology, because:
    -​   open source is independent of companies and countries. It minimises the risk of vendor
         lock-in and getting caught up in political shenanigans or trade disputes;
    -​   open source is the leading model and inherently provides the most flexible platform for
         software development at the digital frontier, from blockchain, high-performance computing
         and artificial intelligence to the internet of things;
    -​   by leveraging open source, Europe can devise an approach to cloud computing and
         software-as-a-service that balances their advantages and risks; being open promotes trust in
         the Union and its institutions

    -​
What has changed, however, is the emergence of new legal instruments in
Europe,       such    as    the   Cyber Resilience Act, which includes a specific
terminological framework for open source and related statutory exclusions.
Additionally, new digital market instruments like the Digital Markets Act must
be taken into account. In these cases, evolving regulatory measures should be
accompanied by tangible, complementary support: in the case of the CRA, by
providing capacity for digital security on foundational layers such as open
source programming libraries; in the case of the DMA, by supporting open
source challengers to gatekeepers; and in the case of the AI Act, by envisaging
activities related to (Cloud and) 'AI development'. ​
​
In Germany some Federal States and the national level have adopted
preferential provisions for open source in public sector use (e.g. OZG 2.0,
EGov Law in Thüringen etc.). A concern here is the fragmentation and slow
adoption pace among Federal states, the European level could provide
harmonisation or technical assistance in defining such clauses - where desired
for public bodies, member states, federal states and municipalities - and issue
European recommendations to that end.

    3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support the development and
    growth of the EU open-source sector and contribute to the EU’s technological sovereignty and
    cybersecurity agenda?

      1.​ EU License Lacuna: The European level offers the European Union
          Public License (EUPL), an open source copyleft license tested in all 27
          member states and available in all European languages. However, no
          equivalent exists for the more common and more simple case of
          non-copyleft licenses. Quite a few state-owned enterprises and public
          sector suppliers outright ban copyleft licenses. To address this gap, it is
          suggested to additionally introduce a European non-copyleft license, so
          European projects do not need to use U.S. licenses like Apache or MIT,
          which do not fully fit our legal systems and require attribution to U.S.
          technology centers unrelated to the European code and its stewardship.
          The EU should further adopt a unified instrument for non-open source
   code transparency (“shared source”, for open hardware licenses based on
   CERN proposals and an instrument for open source AI as defined by OSI.
2.​ Sustainable contributions and maintenance: The well-known cartoon
   example of the “unknown maintainer in Nebraska” highlights the need to
   support obscure critical components of modern software infrastructure.
   The OFE has proposed an EU Sovereign Tech Fund to address this issue,
   as current policies do not provide sufficient tools or resources. Germany’s
   Sovereign Tech Fund, with an annual budget of 30 million EUR, could
   serve as a blueprint for an EU-wide implementation. The European
   Union could also ensure maintenance volunteers receive attribution by
   an EU open source maintainer price..
3.​ Given the importance of Open Source for the European industry and the
   leverage for the single market, the creation of a new European Agency
   for Open Source is suggested. At present, 30 EU agencies in the member
   states serve European agendas.
4.​ The European Union should identify key open source conferences and
   provide limited institutional funding and capacity building for open
   source conferences. I mean established formats such as Europython,
   Fosdem, OFE Open Source Policy Summit, Libre Graphics Meeting,
   Open Tech Summit, Kubecon, and KDE Akademy. It should also promote
   the creation of EU steward organisations established in Europe. Such a
   program could also include travel assistance for European researchers
   and open source stewards to attend key conferences in Europe and
   abroad, such as Fossasia in Hanoi.
5.​ For cybersecurity, the ENISA should be tasked to commission open
   source code reviews and fix issues that have been found, moving from a
   reactive to a proactive stance. The development of static analysis tools
   should be featured.
6.​ The European Union should provide substantial financial assistance for
   the generic prototype EUOS public sector Linux. It would then be usable
   in European product regulation as a reference system for electronics
   manufacturers to disclose Linux platform support and, where applicable,
   potential mandatory cross-platform support, such as in the context of
   antitrust settlements.
7.​ The European level should investigate and seek a solution for the HDMI
   2.1 interoperability case. HDMI Forum Rejects Open-Source HDMI 2.1
   Driver Support Sought By AMD - Phoronix
   8.​ The EU should provide a new European ICT Standard Setting
       Organisation for the 80:20 cases of XML / JSON / Open API formats,
       where data formats and interfaces are well describable in technical
       description languages. The pace of the existing SSOs is not useful for
       these cases.
   9.​ The EU should seek to overcome its dependency on the Windows API
       platform. For this reason, bridge technology should be supported by
       substantial capacity building.
   10.​The EU should ensure that the development of web browser technologies
       becomes less dependent on the reconnaissance-based business models of
       the advertisement industry. Complementary to privacy regulation, the
       EU should support web browsing technologies to the end to enhance the
       privacy and security of users. After all, the currently dominant web
       browser engines have roots in European open source.

4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why?
5. In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to increased competitiveness and
cyber resilience?

I would recommend to focus on the “Core Platform Services” under the Digital
Markets Act, Annex I of the CRA implementing regulation Class I Important
products with digital elements. Furthermore generic indispensable workplace
software such as Office Productivity Suites and high-value industrial and
automotive platforms, including ERP interoperability solutions such as
e-Invoicing, and also the inter-banking transfer / digital euro as prioritised by
the European Central Bank.

Furthermore, the robust enforcement options under Article 7 of the DMA
concerning video communications interoperability would benefit from
reference implementations and platforms prepared for enhanced video call
interoperability. In this context, the Janus WebRTC server from Naples plays a
central role in all open video communications solutions.

Justification: As a complement to regulatory action in these same prioritised
fields; areas where there is strong political will to act or that are of critical
importance to Europe's industrial positioning