Ref. Ares(2026)1225555 - 03/02/2026

MAIN RESPONSE TO THE CALL FOR FEEDBACK

I am a long-time open-source hacker and entrepreneur. I have been using, contributing to and
doing business around open source since 1997. I have seen how open-source has evolved in
some areas (licensing, business models, public appeal, contribution governance models, from
volunteer work to paid jobs, etc) and has also remained static in others (mostly infrastructure
software, sophisticated tooling, abuse by hyperscalers, EU and US accounting for 99% of open
source contributors and entrepreneurs, absence of end-user tools, absence of quality user
experience and user interface work, etc).

I would like to briefly comment on the three aspects the initiative states at the beginning.

(I) encourage greater adoption of open source by public and private users, and encourage
organisations to contribute to open-source development. -> A new procurement framework is
needed where public money is spent in public (open source) code. Tax benefits for
organisations that contribute to established EU official open source sovereign funds would be
welcome.

(II) boost the development and competitiveness of the emerging EU open-source sector. ->
Software building is comparatively cheap compared to other works of labour and yet it has the
ability to transform entire markets. The EU open-source sector has always been "emerging"
since 2002 but has received no institutional support not financial help. The wake-up call for EU
after the recent obvious signs of market decoupling should not insult the intelligence of
open-source developers. We have always been here but we have always been ignored.

(III) strengthen the position of start-ups in the innovation ecosystems. -> Assuming this
sentence refers to open-source startups (otherwise, it's an empty sentence), the reality is that
they might not need specific innovation ecosystems, they are innovative ecosystems
themselves due to how the build technology and how they distribute it.

As for the direct questions put forward, these are my thoughts.

1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector? What are the main
barriers that hamper (i) adoption and maintenance of high-quality and secure open source; and
(ii) sustainable contributions to open-source communities?

The EU open-source sector has the best talent in the world. After all, open-source is an
"invention" of both the US and Europe as a whole. In particular, the EU produces the best
software in the world. It's something we do extremely well and that includes open-source.
Perhaps this is due to how well aligned open-source values and EU values are but also due to
the fact that our social safety net allows for many talented open-source developers to give away
much of their time contributing to these projectsm without risking their well-being.
Unfortunately, many of these open-source projects can't evolve and become significant if
developed on spare time. Many software projects require full focus by a number of people to
become relevant and have a real impact. This requires funding of some sort so you respond to
the sense of urgency with financial support. We elaborate on this below.

2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors? Please provide
concrete examples, including the factors (such as cost, risk, lock-in, security, innovation, among
others) that are most important to assess the added value.

Open Source is what makes a €1000 personal computer investment have the potential to
transform your personal economy and the lives of others. Open Source gives the public and the
industry access to operating systems, programming languages, databases, browsers, network
stacks, media players, productivity tools, creative tools, games so that the digital world is
accessible for everyone. Open Source is fundamentally a social contract that establishes that
technology can be fundamentally generous and altruistic.

Open Source is our digital backbone and discussing its "added value" is as unfair as asking
what's the added value of a "public health system". But if we want to give concrete examples of
the listed topics, here we go:

   ●​ cost: open-source allows software builders to invest more on their talent rather than their
      tooling. It also puts pressure on proprietary attempts to charge for some technologies (ie:
      the Java and .Net programming language/frameworks drama in early 2000's)
   ●​ risk: it depends on how we define risk. If it's related to risk taken by using open-source
      software, there's nothing inherently better in open-source. If it's related to risk of being
      dispossessed (practical ownership), open-source is almost risk-free because your have
      fundamental rights to access, study and repurpose such technology.
   ●​ lock-in: open-source is not guaranteed to be lock-in free but the system of incentives
      around forking and fixing such issues discourages it in the first place. Open-source is
      well known to be interoperable and standards-seeking. It's one of the ways that we,
      open-source developers, use to attract talent.
   ●​ security: this has been widely analysed in academia. While open-source is not immune
      to security bugs, it's more likely to have them detected and fixed. Security by
      transparency.
   ●​ innovation: open-source developers are not forced to innovate all the time but when you
      want to compete with some established open-source product, you can only outsmart it
      with innovation, since cost is not a relevant variable.

3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support the development
and growth of the EU open-source sector and contribute to the EU’s technological sovereignty
and cybersecurity agenda?

Taken and adapted from the below notes.
   ●​ Each EU member state can have a National agency that takes the role to identify and
      select relevant existing open source products that can be easily supported or rearranged
      as packages or suites. This agency can create different “software distributions”
      depending on typical use cases (digital workplace for the public administration, software
      building frameworks and tools, etc). The whole is greater than the sum of its parts and
      open source software distributions have been in existence for more than 3 decades now.
      It’s open to debate whether this National agency would be in charge of supporting those
      deployments or if this should be done via certified partners from the private sector. The
      primary focus would be to serve digital workplaces needs.
   ●​ Sovereign funds with a focus on providing capital to critical and yet invisible open source
      software that is effectively providing business continuity through both digital autonomy
      and sovereignty. Since a majority of these open source products could potentially live in
      isolation, this fund would enforce a principle of interoperability. The primary focus would
      be to serve digital infrastructure needs.
   ●​ Public investments in open source companies that can compete with the existing
      incentives to seek funding elsewhere. If EU member states really consider some open
      source companies to be strategic in their path towards achieving digital sovereignty, then
      there’s no reason why they shouldn’t consider being shareholders of those companies,
      similarly to what already happens in other sectors at a much higher cost.

Focusing on providing capital only for later development stages neglects the early stage
companies' crucial need (start-ups, not yet scale-ups). The easier access to capital in the US for
early stages of a company when success is still not obvious is precisely what fuels a larger
ecosystem of scale-ups. The advantage of providing capital to early stage digital startups is that
it is actually much more cost-effective. The smartest approach would be to consider access to
capital for early stage companies where every invested euro has a bigger chance of turning the
company into a high-growth one.

We like to say that software has a disruptive impact but we sometimes forget to properly
acknowledge that this “disruption” stems from the fact that it is actually extremely cheap to build
software compared to other goods. You could fund 10 promising European open source digital
startups with what it costs to build one kilometre of high-speed railway.

4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why?

Enabling technologies should be prioritised. In other words, building blocks and developer and
designer tools that allow software builders to focus on end-user facing products.

   ●​ Operating systems.
   ●​ Databases.
   ●​ Network protocols, including local-first conflict resolution data exchange (ie: CRDTs).
   ●​   Open Source AI LLMs
   ●​   Cybersecurity tools
   ●​   Developer tools
   ●​   Designer tools

In particular, we believe that open-source desperately needs to have best-in-class user
interface (UI) design tools. Otherwise, open-source will continue to remain away from the
general non-technical public where its explicit benefits are still to be discovered and therefore
recognised.

5. In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to increased competitiveness
and cyber resilience?

Further legislation has to enforce open-source-first and interoperability-first approaches.
Furthermore, DMA’s gatekeepers can’t be left to believe that enforcement through fines can be
accounted for as the cost of doing business in the EU.

Final comments

We speak a lot about digital transformation. We should start speaking about transforming the
digital, too.

The digital doesn’t exist in a vacuum, neither should be treated as the subject of the sentence.
It’s the object. We build the digital. We build the digital we want for ourselves and for the role
that we, as Europeans, want to play in the world.

Open-Source is one of the few keys that can keep EU's digital innovation thriving for many
years. Investing in chips and hardware is necessary but it will take at least a decade or two to
catch-up with other geographies while software and, specially, open-source software, is
something the EU can use to lead the digital world with zero friction in any geopolicatical
landscape. If the EU doesn't seriously invest in Open Source even our "riches" will be
dilapidated very soon.

Many open-source developers and entrepreneurs like myself have tried twice in the past (early
2000's and early 2010's) to build a long-term alliance with the public administrations in EU and
twice we have been ignored. This time the EU faces a fundamental threat and a wake-up call.
Technology is no longer just a question of total cost of ownership, it's about autonomy, resilience
and innovation. It will take a lot of courage to back Open-Source the same way the UE has
backed other pillars of the Union but open-source developers and companies are ready for a
third attempt. Please, this time do something extraordinary and listen. I don't think any of us
wants to see whether we will still be here for a fourth time.
Feb 3rd 2026: Added as part of Pablo Ruiz Múzquiz’s response to “call for
feedback” on European Open Digital Ecosystems.

This is a simple collection of reflections inspired by certain sections of the agenda document.
After each quoted section, there is a comment.

Reference document: Franco-German Economic Agenda (pdf) resulting of the 25th
Franco-German Council of Ministers, 29 August 2025. Pages 4-5, 19-20.

Contributors are: Pablo Ruiz Múzquiz (CEO & Co-founder of Kaleidos/Penpot) and Álvaro
Tejero Cantero (AI Lead of Kaleidos/Penpot).

Page 4

       18. Summit on European digital sovereignty on 18 November 2025: Germany and
       France will organize a high-level summit focusing on European digital sovereignty on
       November 18, 2025, inviting the Commission of the EU, other EU Member States as well
       as business representatives and other stakeholders. This includes a high-level forum
       with key public and private actors in digitalisation from both countries. The parties will
       also use the summit as a starting point to mobilise European investment including
       especially strategic programs with private capital while making sure to align national and
       EU funds. Under the umbrella of the invigorated “Zukunftswerk” or “Forum d’avenir”
       GovTech Campus Germany and La French Tech will present projects for implementation
       and further development of the common digital agenda.

Putting aside the missed opportunity around EU member state presence through their
respective relevant business representatives and stakeholders, we have to celebrate the
courage and the initiative from France and Germany to kickstart what we now believe to be a
new era for EU strategic digital sovereignty from which new world leadership opportunities will
surely arise. A strong digital sovereignty will help build a stronger EU which will, in turn, be able
to present a more credible and reliable leadership across different geographies.

It would be naive to believe that no market decoupling whatsoever between the US and the EU
is required. In other words, that the EU can have their cake and eat it too.
Page 5

        20. Franco-German cooperation on digital workplaces, digital public infrastructures and
        commons: France and Germany commit to scale up and align the use of sovereign tools
        for digital workplaces, especially those developed by DINUM (La Suite numérique) and
        ZenDiS (openDesk), across public administrations, and to establish a common
        ecosystem that prioritizes solutions developed by the private sector. In addition, France
        and Germany will work jointly towards the implementation on the Digital Commons
        EDIC, of which both countries are founding members.

This is great news. We might want to learn from both DINUM and ZenDiS while considering a
Spanish national equivalent. ZenDiS’ openDesk can be adopted as a digital workplace solution
with small tweaks, contributing “upstream” to the original project(s). At the same time, a curated
list of open solutions that have official support from a public agency irrespective of its use within
Spanish public administration can expand on the already existing strengths of LaSuite.

However, we would like to go a bit beyond and seriously consider software design and
development tools and platforms as part of an extended digital workplace definition. Since the
text cites “commons”, let’s define commons in a way that also includes design and development
tools as critical infrastructure. After all, how could the EU pretend to be digitally sovereign if the
building tools themselves are not open source, which is sadly often the case, defeating the
whole purpose.

Since Spain has a long history of building development frameworks, UI design tools and
participatory platforms, it’s uniquely positioned to contribute to a truly 360 view on digital
sovereignty.

Therefore, we believe that a more complete text should read

“digital workplaces, digital building tools, digital public infrastructures and commons”

So that it’s abundantly clear that digital building tools are also a critical element of EU digital
sovereignty.

Page 15

        Regarding the DMA, France and Germany will:
           ●​ increase their cooperation by sharing their views and analysis in order to
              contribute to the first DMA evaluation and towards the future DMA update;
           ●​ coordinate their strategy of influence with known partners on this goal (DMA
              Friends) and towards other member states.
           ●​ in the joint Franco-German initiative for a Summit on European Digital
              Sovereignty seek to coordinate on the scope of DMA core platform services.

Further legislation has to enforce open-source-first and interoperability-first approaches.
Furthermore, DMA’s gatekeepers can’t be left to believe that enforcement through fines can be
accounted for as the cost of doing business in the EU.

Page 19
        (entire page)

We urge France and Germany as well as other EU state members to consider three distinct
lines of work around reliable and professional open source products and companies. Some of
them are inspired by existing French and German initiatives but also Spanish ones.

   -​   A National agency that takes the role to identify and select relevant existing open source
        products that can be easily supported or rearranged as packages or suites. This agency
        can create different “software distributions” depending on typical use cases (digital
        workplace for the public administration, software building frameworks and tools, etc).
        The whole is greater than the sum of its parts and open source software distributions
        have been in existence for more than 3 decades now. It’s open to debate whether this
        National agency would be in charge of supporting those deployments or if this should be
        done via certified partners from the private sector. The primary focus would be to serve
        digital workplaces needs.
   -​   Sovereign funds with a focus on providing capital to critical and yet invisible open source
        software that is effectively providing business continuity through both digital autonomy
        and sovereignty. Since a majority of these open source products could potentially live in
        isolation, this fund would enforce a principle of interoperability. The primary focus would
        be to serve digital infrastructure needs.
   -​   Public investments in open source companies that can compete with the existing
        incentives to seek funding elsewhere. If EU member states really consider some open
        source companies to be strategic in their path towards achieving digital sovereignty, then
        there’s no reason why they shouldn’t consider being shareholders of those companies,
        similarly to what already happens in other sectors at a much higher cost.

Page 26

        The task force shall focus on improving access to capital for high-growth companies
        across Europe, particularly in later development stages.

Focusing on later development stages neglects the early stage companies' crucial need
(start-ups, not yet scale-ups). The easier access to capital in the US for early stages of a
company when success is still not obvious is precisely what fuels a larger ecosystem of
scale-ups. The advantage of providing capital to early stage digital startups is that it is actually
much more cost-effective. The smartest approach would be to consider access to capital for
early stage companies where every invested euro has a bigger chance of turning the company
into a high-growth one.

We like to say that software has a disruptive impact but we sometimes forget to properly
acknowledge that this “disruption” stems from the fact that it is actually extremely cheap to build
software compared to other goods. You could fund 10 promising European open source digital
startups with what it costs to build one kilometer of high-speed railway.

General comment

We speak a lot about digital transformation. We should start speaking about transforming the
digital, too.

The digital doesn’t exist in a vacuum, neither should be treated as the subject of the sentence.
It’s the object. We build the digital. We build the digital we want for ourselves and for the role
that we, as Europeans, want to play in the world.