Ref. Ares(2026)1167354 - 02/02/2026

Gianguido Piani
Feb 2nd, 2026

    Positions about the Call for Evidence “Towards European open digital ecosystems”

1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector? What are the main
barriers that hamper (i) adoption and maintenance of high-quality and secure open source; and (ii)
sustainable contributions to open-source communities?

(i) IT policies by the EU Commission and most Member States support de-facto only the
use of commercial software from the US.
(ii) A good starting point would be to open competitive bidding to open source solutions.
Many calls for bids are formulated today in such way that they can only be formally fulfilled
by commercial software. Strategic considerations should become part of the evaluation of
competitive bids.

2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors? Please provide
concrete examples, including the factors (such as cost, risk, lock-in, security, innovation, among
others) that are most important to assess the added value.

Security and not having to pay for services and licenses overseas. Isn’t that an argument
strong enough?

3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support the development and
growth of the EU open-source sector and contribute to the EU’s technological sovereignty and
cybersecurity agenda?

In practical terms, a good beginning would be the creation of a competence center in
support of Open Source solutions in public administration as well as in small and medium
enterprises. This new center should lead new developments, test package and hardware
compatibility, draft instructions. It should cooperate with the IETF, the Linux Foundation
and other standard-setting organisations. In this respect, the best European references are
Airbus, CERN, ESA. None of them is an institution of the EU. Refer to the Computer
Chaos Club for support, not only to companies such as SAP and Siemens.
Russia has been much more successful in the IT sector than the EU and its Member
states. Yandex, founded in 1997, was the first European solution on a par with Google to
offer search engine, email, maps, e-payments, remote drives and several other services.
Vkontakte is still today the only serious European competitor to Facebook. AstraLinux is a
Russian Debian-derivate used, among others, by the Russian administration and security
services. China’s national operating system is the Linux-based Ubuntu Kylin.
The EU should follow this approach and quickly develop a Linux-based distribution for free
download. Technically, it’s a quite simple matter. It could be a Debian/Ubuntu distribution
with preinstalled modules and certificates for identification, e-signature and other basic
public administration services.
The most important aspect of a official EU Linux distribution, however, would be to serve
as reference for the development of commercial packages. Today much important
enterprise software, e.g., for tax reports, production planning, or project coordination, is
available only for MS Windows. If there were a stable and recognized, reference EU Linux
platform, many private companies would begin to offer their products also for that
environment and in this way help enlarge its user base.

4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why?
First of all we need simple, wide-scale solutions for the public administration as well as
general-purpose software for the wide public. Ubuntu (or other EU package) together with
LibreOffice could replace Microsoft and Office for most applications. The EU Commission
should begin by giving the good example by using it.
The EU shall officially support and use open standards such as OpenDocument.
Solutions for personal identification, banking, e-signature etc. must be available with at
least one implementation fully independent of companies from outside Europe and not rely
only on smartphones.
The EU Commission could require that any smartphone apps, traditionally made available
only for Android and Apple, shall also be available for f-droid. An alternative to the
compulsory use of smartphones would be a virtual emulator for desktops also produced
and certified by European authorities.

5. In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to increased competitiveness and
cyber resilience?

Better cyber resilience will be reached when common people will be more aware of the
tools they use. It’s not matter of some particular software, open or not. Instead, education
and awareness are more important to achieve cyber resilience.