Ref. Ares(2026)223431 - 09/01/2026

Plea for a European Curated Open Source Repository

Proposal
Set up a European Curated Open Source Repository1 which:
    • identifies which open source software is considered vital for building Digital Sovereignty
    • setup a publicly available repository from where anyone can obtain the software. This
        includes the source, as well as binaries and artifacts to utilize the software
    • setup that the source, which is usually obtained from upstream sources,
        ◦ is validated
        ◦ tested for security issues (i.e. introduction of deliberate or accidental vulnerabilities,
            hidden back-doors etc.)
        ◦ binaries built from source by the repository for security reasons
        ◦ if needed added artifacts to facilitate usage (i.e. provide deployment configurations etc.)
    • setup support in such a way that this organisation can provide (security) patches if needed,
        add features considered beneficial for EU (preferably Upstream) and if needed take of
        maintenance and further development if needed
    • do this in such a way that it will avoid disturbing business models of upstream providers
        unless needed

This will enable
European (and other) organisations to utilise the software in the Repo and be ensured of:
    •   security: be ensured that source is validated and the binaries have not been tampered with
    •   viability of the software: mitigation for the risk of abandon-ware
This will allow European organisations, both public and commercial, to focus on how to build
products and services with them in stead of having each organisation having to mitigate the risks
themselves of simply accept them.

Explanation
The components to build a cloud platform are to a very large degree available in Open Source
projects. Nonetheless when doing due diligence in selecting these components risks exist that are
often not that easy to mitigate by individual organisations.
These risks include:

    •   Abandon-ware: no longer supported by software
        ◦ Company backed open source may stop providing the software via a Open Source
           license for various reasons (examples exist such as Minio)
        ◦ Some key software have only a few volunteer contributors that may cease to maintain
           the software
        ◦ Companies may increasingly restrict features to no free/open source licenses

As the source is Open Source, it is technically possible to fork2 the software and start maintaining
the software yourself. If software is popular enough, when software is abandoned often new

1 Repository: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_repository
2   Forking: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fork_(software_development)
volunteers appear. A clear example is how LibreOffice was forked from Open Office when the
ownership of Open Office changed.
However this is not that easy and even if this happens, it will take time before this yields results. A
central repository that has the capability to support the software, including supplying emergency
patches if upstream cannot or will not do this timely as well as take over if needed will effectively
be an insurance against this.

   •   Low trust in main contributors due to geopolitics.
       ◦ Although the source is available and can be checked, the binaries distributed may differ
          unless you build yourself
       ◦ Source is updated often, running security checks on changes requires work
   •   Supply Chain attacks. This is unfortunately a real threat where bad actors sometimes are
       capable to inject malware even if the contributors themselves are trustworthy.

There is very interesting and software which can be of vital importance available open source.
Technically each organisation can for security reasons obtain the source of the software and
updates, validate this and build the software to be used, thereby avoiding the risk that malware that
is not part of the published source is secretly included in the binaries. However this takes effort and
it is much more efficient if a central repository which can be trusted does this.

Example Bitnami
Bitnami (https://bitnami.com/) is a good example of such a repository. It was an available to all
repository which provides similar services. It also shows the risks of a commercial offering, after
being acquired by Broadcom it is no longer free. So it also demonstrates that this service can be
revoked which means adding risk.

The benefits
This enables organisations, both in the EU and outside of the EU, to reliably to utilise the
components and focus on building products and services. By taking away this burden it can
accelerate development.
This is an example of something where it is beneficial when this offered by the EU. The effort is the
same whether you supply it for one country or the EU/the rest of the world.

Prevent undermining business models of upstream developers
It should be noted that it should not be the intention to compete with the upstream developers.
Especially when the software is mainly developed by a company, the repository runs the risk of
being detrimental for the business model of that company. Therefore the business model should be
taken into account. If the upstream company relies on providing support, users should be directed to
the upstream company for support. Often advanced features require a paid for license etc.
In principal no competing services should be offered.
If done properly it can be beneficial for the companies to have their software adopted. They can use
it as selling point that software is considered valuable and can be trusted.

Additional activities
The organisation behind such a repository can deploy additional activities such as providing
funding for Open Source initiatives with a strong EU footprint, such as the contributors being
largely based in the EU or for software of strategic importance for EU cloud providers. Other
activities to foster a European Open Source community can be deployed.