Ref. Ares(2026)1203409 - 03/02/2026

            Policy Recommendations for Integrating Living Labs in
                       Framework Programme 10 (F10)

The European Union is increasingly recognizing the value of Living Labs in its innovation
strategies. In Horizon Europe1, the EU's flagship research and innovation program, Living Labs
are specifically mentioned as a key approach for developing and testing new technologies and
solutions.

The European Commission has launched five ambitious European Missions to address critical
global challenges, including A Soil Deal for Europe, Climate-Neutral and Smart Cities,
Adaptation to Climate Change, Beating Cancer, and Healthy Oceans, Seas, Coastal and Inland
Waters. Living labs, a collaborative approach that seamlessly integrates researchers, citizens,
and stakeholders, have emerged as a pivotal tool for achieving the EU Missions. Living Labs
are mentioned in each of the missions, but especially the Mission ‘A Soil Deal for Europe’
has the main goal of to establish 100 living labs and lighthouses to lead the transition towards
healthy soils by 20302.

The New European Innovation Agenda mentions how living labs for green digital solutions
and smart zero pollution under the Zero Pollution Action Plan will support engagement with
regional and local authorities alongside stakeholders to develop local actions for green and
digital transition, and identifies Living Labs, along with sand-boxes and test bed living labs as
a way to facilitate the deployment of disruptive technologies through future calls and support
policymakers and innovators in their approach to experimentation in the EU3. Moreover, states
that the Commission will also support the creation of living labs and incubators for example,
to connect innovators and public administrators to provide innovative solutions in areas of
public need.

Based on the request in the Communication from The Commission to the European Parliament,
the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions
‘Pathway to a Healthy Planet for All’, especially in the statement in the Flagship 7, ENoLL
together with the EC developed recommendations4 on using Living Lab for a climate and
environment-friendly use of digital solutions to accelerate zero pollution efforts, with a
particular focus on citizen engagement, that have been adopted by the Stakeholder Platform
Zero Pollution.

Living Labs Definition
Living Labs are open innovation ecosystems in real-life environments based on a systematic
user co-creation approach that integrates research and innovation activities in communities
and/or multi-stakeholder environments, placing citizens and other end-users at the centre of
the innovation process.

1
  Living Labs have been explicitly and consistently mentioned in different Work Programmes since the beginning of Horizon
Europe. In the WP 23/24only, Living Las have been cited in more than 20 topics across 5 Work Programmes.
2
  https://research-and-innovation.ec.europa.eu/funding/funding-opportunities/funding-programmes-and-open-calls/horizon-
europe/eu-missions-horizon-europe/soil-deal-europe_en
3
  https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52022DC0332
4
  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14050384
As intermediaries, Living Labs connect citizens, research organizations, businesses, and
government to co-create joint value, develop prototypes, and scale innovations. This
collaborative framework engages all actors of the quadruple helix by implementing the 4P
Public – Private – People – Partnerships approach.

By focusing on users—such as citizens, farmers, healthcare providers, other non-citizen users,
companies, and different key stakeholders—Living Labs ensure direct engagement, making
research and development responsive to diverse societal and sectoral needs.

Bridging the gap between research and market adoption
Living Labs (LLs) are dynamic ecosystems that bridge the gap between research and market
adoption. By engaging end-users, researchers, industries, and communities in real-world
settings, LLs de-risk innovation by aligning solutions with real-world requirements,
accelerating their adoption and long-term viability. These environments extend innovation
beyond traditional laboratory confines into public spaces, homes, workplaces, agricultural
fields, and other community contexts. Their iterative experimentation enables the validation of
products, services, policies, and regulatory frameworks, offering a platform for evidence-based
policy-making and regulatory learning.

Through collaborative problem-solving, rapid prototyping, and innovation cycles grounded in
the quadruple helix model, Living Labs tackle complex societal challenges and bolster Europe’s
competitiveness in the global market.

Living Labs as Research Infrastructures and Technology Research Infrastructures
LLs are integral components of Europe’s evolving Research & Innovation infrastructure
ecosystem, operating across all Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs) and supporting innovation
at every stage, from early research to large-scale implementation. With their flexible approach,
LLs also align with the characteristics of Research Infrastructures (RIs) for early-stage
experimentation and Technology Infrastructures (TIs) for advanced development and
regulatory learning.

Trust as foundation of long-term cooperation and tangible results
Living Labs function as "trust brokers" within the innovation ecosystem, fostering an
environment of transparency, mutual accountability, and sustained stakeholder involvement.
Through consistent, open communication, they build and reinforce trust across the spectrum
of participants, including specific groups such as citizens, farmers, community organizations,
and other end-users. This foundation of trust enables long-term cooperation, grounded in
real-life operational settings.

Living Labs address today’s challenge and tomorrow’s sustainable and competitive
future
Living Labs deliver solutions for today’s urgent challenges through speed, agility, and de-
risking, while building strategic foundations for tomorrow’s sustainable and competitive
future. They bridge immediate action and long-term vision, driving progress in the green and
digital transitions and ensuring resilience in an ever-changing world.
Living labs are a global movement that foster the international cooperation in research,
innovation and digitalization.
Europe is currently leading the Living Lab movement. This general-purpose social technology
is reinforcing Nord to South, and East to West open cooperation between innovation
ecosystems. The world is becoming an open Living Lab, and Living Lab practices and Living
Labs diplomacy can support an open, bottom-up dialogue among Organisations and
Countries.

POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS:
ENoLL Policy Recommendation align with the independent expert report “Align, act, accelerate:
Research, technology and innovation to boost European competitiveness Publication
metadata5” that provides strategic recommendations on maximising the impact of EU
Research and Innovation programmes in the future, and with the “The future of European
competitiveness”6 or better known as Draghi report.

1. Prioritize Living Labs as Essential Actors in Co-Creation and User-Centric Innovation
(ACCELERATE)
To strengthen Europe’s innovation ecosystem, FP10 should prioritize Living Labs as integral
partners in EU-funded projects. As collaborative environments that bring together citizens,
industries, academia, and public bodies, Living Labs are uniquely positioned to drive user-
centred, real-world testing of innovative solutions. Recognizing Living Labs as key project
participants in FP10 will foster inclusive, agile, and efficient pathways to addressing societal
challenges.

2. Integrate Living Labs in the EU's Green and Digital Transition Goals (ALIGN)
As Europe advances its Green Deal and Digital Transition, Living Labs should be positioned as
key intermediaries to test, localize, and scale these innovations at the community level. Living
Labs’ real-world testing environments make them invaluable for translating EU goals into
tangible, sustainable outcomes that meet local needs. Embedding Living Labs into Green and
Digital Transition initiatives within F10 will drive localized impact, from renewable energy
solutions to smart city infrastructure.

3. Promote Living Labs as Facilitators of Regional Innovation and Social Inclusion
(ALIGN, ACCELERATE)
Living Labs act as key enablers of regional innovation, especially in underserved communities.
By mobilizing local stakeholders and engaging diverse social groups, Living Labs foster
inclusive co-creation processes and address disparities in access to innovation. FP10 should
support Living Labs in economically disadvantaged and rural regions, ensuring equitable
distribution of resources and fostering social inclusion through community-focused
innovation.

5
    https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/2f9fc221-86bb-11ef-a67d-01aa75ed71a1/language-en
6
    https://commission.europa.eu/document/download/97e481fd-2dc3-412d-be4c-f152a8232961_en
4. Enhance Europe’s innovation ecosystem by supporting Living Labs as Research and
Technology Infrastructure (ACT, ACCELERATE)
To enhance Europe’s innovation ecosystem, FP10 should recognize and support the dual
function of Living Labs within the broader framework of Research Infrastructures (RIs) and
Technology Infrastructures (TIs). Living Labs provide the services to support the whole
innovation process, focusing on both early-stage experimentation and fundamental research
(RIs) as well as to scaling and deploying innovations in real-world contexts (TIs). Expanding
innovation vouchers to include access to Living Labs will enable SMEs and startups to leverage
these unique capabilities across varying Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs). Additionally,
supporting ENoLL’s harmonization initiatives7 will ensure consistent methodologies, making
Living Labs more effective in bridging the gap between research outcomes and market-ready
solutions.

5. Leverage Living Labs to Bridge Europe’s Innovation Gap and Boost Competitiveness
(ACT, ACCELERATE)
To address the innovation gap highlighted in the Draghi Report, FP10 could leverage the role
of Living Labs as open innovation ecosystems that actively involve public, private, academic,
and civil society actors. Living Labs contribute to closing this gap by providing collaborative
environments for co-creating, testing, validating and scaling innovations in real-world settings,
effectively bridging the divide between early-stage research and market deployment. By de-
risking innovation and ensuring that solutions meet societal and market needs, Living Labs
enhance Europe's ability to translate research into competitive advantages, supporting the
EU's strategic goal of closing the innovation gap and strengthening global competitiveness.

4. Enhance Impact Measurement Tools for Living Labs within EU Projects (ACT)
FP10 should invest in developing robust impact measurement frameworks tailored to the
unique contributions of Living Labs. Harmonized impact metrics, like the ones developed by
ENoLL Harmonisation working group, would allow Living Labs to demonstrate the value they
bring to EU-funded projects and support evidence-based policy-making at the EU level. A
comprehensive toolkit for impact assessment, evolution of the actual value capturing tool
developed by ENoLL, would also enhance transparency, helping Living Labs convey their value
in addressing societal challenges.

5. Establish a Voucher Scheme to Leverage Living Labs for Experimentation and
Innovation (ACCELERATE)
FP10 should include a voucher-based funding mechanism to enable startups, universities, and
cities to utilize Living Labs for experimentation and innovation. This scheme, inspired by the
European Innovation Council model, would support the operational capacity of Living Labs by
providing resources for training, infrastructure, and digital tools. By offering vouchers,
stakeholders can access Living Labs to test, prototype, and scale solutions while fostering
collaboration across sectors. This approach would enhance the reach and effectiveness of

7
  Harmonisation aims to reconcile diEerences and promote coherence between multiple practices while allowing more ﬂexibility
compared to standardisation, which focuses on establishing a single set of speciﬁcations. Harmonized Living Lab services and
processes across the ENoLL Network enable increased eEiciency, productivity, improved quality, foster collaboration, scalability,
and better risk management.
The Harmonisation Working Group has been established to deﬁne a Harmonization Framework with suggested processes,
guidelines and recommendations on how Living Labs can perform their activities in a harmonized way that is widely accepted by the
Living Lab community across the world. https://enoll.org/working-group/harmonization/
Living Labs, also under-resourced regions, allowing them to contribute more substantially to
FP10 projects and drive EU-wide innovation.

6. Establish a Dedicated Funding Stream for Living Lab-Initiated Projects
FP10 should create a dedicated funding stream accessible directly to Living Labs, allowing
them to initiate projects that reflect community-driven priorities. Currently, Living Labs often
play a supporting role in larger projects, limiting their ability to lead on locally relevant
innovations. A targeted funding stream will empower Living Labs to elevate local needs to the
European stage, creating bottom-up solutions that leverage regional strengths and
knowledge.

7. Foster Regulatory Innovation Through Living Labs (ALIGN)
Living Labs offer a unique platform for regulatory learning by providing real-world testing
grounds for innovative solutions. By involving multiple stakeholders, including regulators,
industry, and citizens, Living Labs can facilitate the co-creation of regulatory frameworks that
are agile, adaptable, and aligned with societal needs. Through iterative experimentation and
data-driven insights, Living Labs can identify and uncover regulatory barriers and
opportunities, inform policy decisions, and accelerate the adoption of innovative technologies.
Therefore, policymakers should actively support the development and scaling of Living Labs,
together with the adoption of sandboxes, to foster a regulatory environment that is conducive
to innovation and societal well-being.

We would kindly request a meeting with the Commissioner to discuss the importance
of Living Labs, with the ENoLL Secretariat represented by Chair Wim De Kinderen,
Vice Presidents Georgia Ayfantopoulou and Evdokimos Konstantinidis, and Director
Martina Desole.