Ref. Ares(2026)1129739 - 01/02/2026

    OpenStreetMap Foundation | St John’s Innovation Centre, Cowley Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WS, United Kingdom |
                                                osmfoundation.org

Message to send to the Request for Comments:

We asked the OpenStreetMap (OSM) Community to answer the questions posed in the Call
for evidence. OSM is a project to create a global database of geospatial data,
crowdsourced by volunteers and released with a free license, and which runs on open-
source software. It is one of the most prominent examples of digital commons. What
follows is a summary of the given answers, aggregated by the OpenStreetMap Foundation
(OSMF). The OSMF’s goal is to support the OSM project. We do so by, among others, being
the custodian of the core infrastructure the project runs on (database, website, API), acting
as a legal entity for the project, providing a vehicle for the project fundraising, organizing
an annual conference, and having various Working Groups (communications, licensing,
engineering, and others). The OSMF is based in the United Kingdom for historical reasons,
but is transitioning to be based within the European Union.

1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector?
What are the main barriers that hamper
(i) adoption and maintenance of high-quality and secure open source; and
(ii) sustainable contributions to open-source communities?

Strengths

The strengths found by the community are:

Europe stands strong in technical quality, open standards, public sector alignment, and
relevant & community-governed infrastructure software that supports our digital
sovereignty and avoids vendor lock-in.

Europe is and always has been highly connected both internally and to the rest of the
world. This reinforces the benefits of Open Source and subsequently of the sector in
Europe. Also, the social model of many educated people having available time beside their
day jobs means that there is a broad talent pool of volunteer and part-paid developers.

Europe has a strong OSS community with existing knowledge and culture of building up a

          OpenStreetMap Foundation is registered in England and Wales with Company Registration No: 5912761.
           Registered Office: St John’s Innovation Centre, Cowley Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WS, United Kingdom.
digital infrastructure on a shoestring budget in an extremely efficient way and with
privacy, equity and democratic process in mind.

Weaknesses

The weaknesses found by the community are:

Design power is easier to concentrate where capital is higher, but co-ordination can be
hampered when funding is unreliable. An example can be shown in the history of three
mobile navigation applications based on OpenStreetMap data. Maps.Me / Organic Maps /
CoMaps are forks which started from the same original codebase. Governance issues and
disagreements between shareholders, developers and community views led to their
divergence and fragmentation.

False Flag Digital Commons, where the public contributes under false preferences of
community-driven work, but the database in reality belongs to private interests can lead to
disappointment and future untrust in real digital commons projects.

We struggle with fragmented initiatives, risk-averse procurement, and chronic
underfunding of maintenance and security. Grants usually cover feature development, but
not the underlying and necessary maintenance.
This leaves many critical projects with just one part-time maintainer.

The Open Source Software community is good at developing technology but lacks
communication, business and politics skills.

There is a lack of European cloud providers, with platforms relying on American or Chinese
firms.

Barriers

The barriers found by the community are:

Adoption and maintenance are hampered by a funding bias towards market-ready
features over less visible security or structural refactoring work. This leaves critical
infrastructure vulnerable.

Sustainable contributions to the high-performance rendering space are hampered by an
inherent high complexity, excluding casual volunteers and leaving one (maybe two)
maintainer(s) capable of doing the work, who then rapidly burnout.

           OpenStreetMap Foundation is registered in England and Wales with Company Registration No: 5912761.
            Registered Office: St John’s Innovation Centre, Cowley Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WS, United Kingdom.
Underlying both issues is the widespread free-rider dynamic, where everyone is using it
but only a few are paying. With the current shift in the private sector towards focusing
solely on ROI, this situation will deteriorate in the next few years.

For many areas of software there is a vendor lock-in in place. Many software users would
rather be users of existing software than take on the challenge of creating software.

Secondly, many IT departments are substantially underfunded, along with the
organisations they support, and expectations about appropriate salaries skewed. As a
result, there is a risk that artifacts from underfunding are misperceived as shortcomings of
newly introduced Open Source components.

It is understood that in some cases it may work the other way around. There are instances
where the adoption of OpenStreetMap had a fast enough effect on cost savings or
enabling work at all within the available budget because efficiency gains materalize fast
enough. This usually happens where a rather competent staff can take advantage of a
relatively simple software stack, but this is the exception.

Many projects have a general uncertainty about their funding and have a rather short
funding horizon. In the OpenStreetMap ecosystem, few projects have a secured funding
beyond a year or so, and elsewhere it might be even shorter. This is even true despite it
being used for infrastructure with decades of lifetime.

More sources of funding over a longer horizon of time will help developers to more clearly
highlight long term downstream use from otherwise more tentative applications.

2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors? Please
provide concrete examples, including the factors (such as cost, risk, lock-in, security,
innovation, among others) that are most important to assess the added value.

For the public sector, MapLibre (a collection of open-source mapping libraries, commonly
used to show OpenStreetMap data) provides essential digital sovereignty and cost control,
allowing agencies such as the Institut Cartogràfic i Geològic de Catalunya (ICGC) or
Landesamt für Digitalisierung, Breitband und Vermessung to provide critical infrastructure
without the risks that a commercial solution would have.

In the private sector, major corporations like AWS and Meta leverage MapLibre
commoditize the map rendering layer, avoiding competitor licensing fees while enabling
nimble startups like Felt to pursue permissionless innovation on a flexible, open
architecture.

         OpenStreetMap Foundation is registered in England and Wales with Company Registration No: 5912761.
          Registered Office: St John’s Innovation Centre, Cowley Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WS, United Kingdom.
Ultimately, the added value is best assessed by the strategic exit option of the Fork button
weighed against the operational costs of maintenance.

Interoperability

The Metropolregion Ruhr (Germany) has used OpenStreetMap data to create an end user
map: it enabled them to use the accurate information of what is on the ground
independent of department friction or policy side-effects. The mission critical advantage is
that OpenStreetMap is a neutral platform, opposed to many partial data sources that are
incompatible to each other. Some transit agencies have modeled station data OSM or use
Points of Interest information from OSM for again being an unhampered and
comprehensive source.

For the same reason, some fire brigades and some government agencies have at time
used OpenStreetMap data as a fairly neutral source to reality check outdated or
incomplete data they got from responsible utility companies or other sources. We do not
have a citable source for this.

The Deutsche Bahn has started to share the availability of their elevators in real time. This
has in combination with OpenStreetMap data not only enabled access-free routing. It also
attracted people to reflect about the data, to uncover patterns, and to build public trust in
the infrastructure.

New Applications

Most bicycle navigation systems and virtually all pedestrian navigation systems are based
on OpenStreetMap data.

While there is hardly a business model to collect and maintain the full grid of ways for
bicycles and pedestrians, there is a strong interest from actual users of these ways to keep
them mapped. As a result, the openness of the platform is mission critical to bring enough
mappers to work on one coherent set of data and trust it to exist long-term.

Both navigation modes also profit from a lot of actual Open Source software development.
The challenges to get directions for these modes of transit right a different from car
navigation. The presence of a huge and accurate data set has been vital to supply the

         OpenStreetMap Foundation is registered in England and Wales with Company Registration No: 5912761.
          Registered Office: St John’s Innovation Centre, Cowley Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WS, United Kingdom.
software development with samples what does exist and what does not.

All open source navigation systems are in heavy use in Europe, and many of them are
maintained in Europe.

It is reasonable to believe that a substantial part of the modal shift from cars to bicycles is
due to the availability of practial navigation tools. I.e. the open source stack has a positive
environmental impact here.

Visibility and Enabling

The city of Düsseldorf (Germany) runs a huge fleet of gas lighting for more than a century.
This has only been perceived as the actual valuable heritage that it is after activists have
created a map of their positioning and shared that with the local newspapers. The project
has only been in reach of few individuals because a stack of open source software around
OpenStreetMap exists and the lamps have been recorded in OpenStreetMap.

I.e. there has been the real world effect of turning the gas lighting into actual heritage.

A less spectacular but even more impactful effect is that OpenStreetMap data is mission
critical to geolocate photos. Geolocation tools like the ones Bellingcat or Deutsche Welle
rely on the possibility to have highly flexible search options on geodata, which is only
possible by an open source software stack operating on fully open data.

3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support the
development and growth of the EU open-source sector and contribute to the EU’s
technological sovereignty and cybersecurity agenda?

The OpenStreetMap community believes fostering collaboration between academia, and
open source and open data communities.

Calls for public data contributions should be regulated similarly to public solicitation of
funds so as to maintain trust.

Establishing an EU Sovereign Tech Fund (STF), dedicated to financing the essential but
currently unpaid maintenance and security audits of our common, digital public goods.
         OpenStreetMap Foundation is registered in England and Wales with Company Registration No: 5912761.
          Registered Office: St John’s Innovation Centre, Cowley Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WS, United Kingdom.
This would shift the landscape from “innovation grants” to long term resilience.

This direct investment fixes the market failure of the “free as in beer” open-source
sentiment.

Examples are refactoring a complex C++ rendering engine into a memory safe language
for added security or just being able to fund a security audit (which most OSS projects
cannot do financially).

If this does not happen, the market will further sour, and more OSS projects will have to
seek different sources of funding - usually not so well aligned with the public good, but
rather making ends meet.

Ensuring that devices can run maps based on any given data, so the consumer has the
right to decide which source to use, and not locking them on the data and software
provided by the device manufacturer.

EU open-source sector and contribute to the EU’s technological sovereignty and
cybersecurity agenda?

The main challenge of Open Source is to have a sustainable business model amid the ever
present opportunity to free-ride. The actual added value comes from the provided
sovereignty, from attracting more competent people, and long term maintainability, in
particular independent from the original vendor. None of this is usually visible already on a
quarterly bottom line.

The EU should ensure that tenders for public procurement are friendly towards Open
Source. The longer the term of the procurement, the more important this is.
The strongest asset of Open Source is that the purchaser retains the right to copy and
modify the code and may repair or rebuild the system or parts thereof at any later time
with work done by any company of the purchasers choosing, with no additional fee.
Procurement shall include such clauses.

A strong antipattern is if laws award to a company a de facto monopoly.

4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why?

         OpenStreetMap Foundation is registered in England and Wales with Company Registration No: 5912761.
          Registered Office: St John’s Innovation Centre, Cowley Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WS, United Kingdom.
The EU should prioritize the transition of critical open-source infrastructure toward
memory safety, specifically funding the modernization of legacy C++ codebases to
eliminate systematic issues like buffer overflows and undefined behavior to newer
languages like Rust, Swift or Go.

For foundational projects like MapLibre, which process untrusted data on millions of
devices, rewriting core components in memory-safe languages (like Rust) is a massive but
necessary undertaking to ensure resilience against modern cyber threats. Prioritizing this
area moves the ecosystem from a reactive posture of “patching bugs” to a proactive
posture of “secure-by-design” architecture, directly supporting the goals of the Cyber
Resilience Act.

The market will not prioritise this because currently the cost of a cyberattack is still
perceived as lower. With the advent of the next class of advanced persistent threat, a false
friend.
The market is also currently not funding the demands that the CRA sets.

Open Source shows its strengths towards long term support and towards making
contributions easier for any competent party.
This results in a high benefit-effort-ratio in the context of infrastructure. The longer a
system is supposed to exist, the more benefit comes from the fact that it can be
maintained by a broad set of people.

In addition, more grounded systems with the simplest possible interfaces have lower
barriers of entry. By a lower number of dependencies they also have a longer useful
lifetime.

Typical examples of nearly universal usage are web servers and browsers, databases, in
particular classical relational databases, operating systems and runtime environments on
top of them. But also web projects that preserve the knowledge of the world (where
OpenStreetMap does humbly see itself along WikiMedia and others).

By contrast, the technology of the day (AI, Cryptocurrency, Quantum Computing) is usually
exploited by a whole flock of venture capital start-ups that are designed to attract and
burn money and burn attention for that purpose as well. This is usually a poor use of
            OpenStreetMap Foundation is registered in England and Wales with Company Registration No: 5912761.
             Registered Office: St John’s Innovation Centre, Cowley Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WS, United Kingdom.
taxpayer money, although it is understood that there is political momentum in each case.

The German STF has proven to pick a decent choice of infrastructure projects.
Thus a simple but very effective approach can be to

    • create an STF on the full European level in coordination with the German STF
    • hand over one Euro to them for every ten Euro of investment made elsewhere for IT
       technology of the day, i.e. a fixed small ratio to emphasize the efficiency advantage
       that this approach has

5. In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to increased
competitiveness and cyber resilience?

In automotive and logistics, European carmakers (VW, BMW) are currently buying into US
firms like Mapbox, Google, or Apple.
A more competitive MapLibre would allow these firms to skip paying per-user licensing
fees, directly boosting cost and innovation competitiveness.

In emergency response and defense, we must recognize that Europe is no longer a
backwater but is facing active threats - be they pandemics, climate disasters, or armed
conflicts…
We need to do better than we have done in the past decades with better-functioning, fully
offline capable maps that survive where a coordinated cyberattack would have brought
centralized services to their knees.

The only way to achieve this is by investing in open source directly, rather than relying
solely on the regulatory pressure of the Cyber Resilience Act.

Simply said, everyhwere. Almost no piece of software is simple enough to be proven
harmless.

A hidden kill switch on defense equipment is an obvious risk, but a hidden kill switch on
electrical equipment or many public service vehicles can be devastative, too. This goes all
the way to social media where a bias in censoring or hiding content is an obvious device of
manipulating public opinion.

         OpenStreetMap Foundation is registered in England and Wales with Company Registration No: 5912761.
          Registered Office: St John’s Innovation Centre, Cowley Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WS, United Kingdom.
The more grounded example of that only a common data format of open data made a
map available to everybody from first responders to market authorities to simply an
ecosystem of service providers has already been given.

OSS works similarly to some science fields, where maintainers are moving the field further,
and sharing their works with the community. With enough funding, maintainers can
support themselves and their work, and knowledge transfer to the commercial world can
happen.

The consultation took place at the following web forum, where the answers given by
any specific user can be found.
https://community.openstreetmap.org/t/request-for-comments-for-the-european-open-digital-
ecosystem-strategy/140258

          OpenStreetMap Foundation is registered in England and Wales with Company Registration No: 5912761.
           Registered Office: St John’s Innovation Centre, Cowley Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WS, United Kingdom.