Ref. Ares(2026)1217171 - 03/02/2026

                                 RTE’s feedback
  Towards European Open Digital Ecosystems
                                   February 3rd, 2026

        Open source is not only an extremely efficient way to develop software
and share intellectual property: it is a philosophy that empowers individuals,
fosters collaboration, and drives additive innovation. By embracing collective
intelligence and transparency, and by pooling efforts and skills, open source enables
us to build better, more secure, and more sustainable technology. It breaks down
barriers, accelerates learning, and federates contribution for the benefit of all
stakeholders.
RTE believes that its corporate mission as a Transmission System Operator, and its
transformation to meet tomorrow’s energy challenges, can only be achieved efficiently
through open-source collaboration.
For these reasons, RTE welcomes and strongly support the European                                             1
Commission's initiative to address strategic issues related to open-source
ecosystem.

        Since 2019, RTE has taken a proactive role in the growth of an open-
source ecosystem in the energy sector, notably as founding and strategic
member of LF Energy (https://lfenergy.org/). RTE has published its open-source
manifest, (https://opensource.rte-france.com). RTE has also endorsed the Open
Source       United      Nations    Principles     since    March    2025  (see
https://unite.un.org/en/news/sixteen-organizations-endorse-un-open-source-
principles).
RTE’s strategic participation in open-source ecosystems combines direct involvement
in projects (taking proactive roles in technical governance), procurement of “directed”
open-source software services (steering the use of collaborative open-source
technologies and upstream contributions) and active role in the governance of
foundations (i.e. LF Energy) and in advocacy. The aim is to build a surrounding
cutting-edge ecosystem that can deliver core-business digital assets and
innovation, while guaranteeing long-term sustainability and resilience.
Hence, RTE shares the Commission’s statement that “A strong and developed open-
source sector can effectively contribute to further EU innovation and accelerate
standardisation, strengthening the EU’s international competitiveness, preserving its

                                                                                           1
                                                          Towards European Open Digital Ecosystems

    sovereignty, and ensuring its continuous economic prosperity, security, resilience and
    global influence”.

    RTE develops its workforce for R&D and industrializes production-grade open-
    source digital assets – addressing core needs in power system management,
    grid planning, and asset management – via robust ICT teams. While essential,
    these require Service Level Agreements (SLAs, Levels 1–4) procured from
    experienced Digital Service Providers. They should demonstrate their capacity to
    contribute Upstream to open source for bug fixes, functional and technical evolutions
    or urgent vulnerability. If public procurement actors move massively to open-source in
    the coming years, these players could be European champions of Digital Public Goods.
    An improved version of the EU open-source catalogue could be a compass to create
    a synchronous demand creating offer from Digital Service Providers to the market. This
    improvement could be a matrix like this one:

2

       Figure 1: Matrix of common digital needs in the EU verticals and administrations
     In this improved version of the EU OSS catalogue, we would first assess the maturity levels
      of available products and ecosystems (LF Energy, Eclipse SDV, OpenRail Association, …)
    across relevant horizontals and verticals, and second, evaluate the maturity of Digital Service
     Providers publicly conducting upstream development for those products. This virtuous circle
    would also help prevent maintainer burnout among volunteers facing widespread adoption of
                                            their products.

                RTE Réseau de Transport d’Électricité • www.rte-france.com • @rte_france
                                                      Towards European Open Digital Ecosystems

Strengths and Weaknesses of the EU open-
source sector
The open-source sector has several strengths that should be recognised
 Based on RTE's experience, six main forces characterise OSS, which can be summarised
  in six words: interoperability, durability, modularity, cost-efficiency, innovation, community.

 The first and foremost strength of the open-source sector is interoperability. The
  open-source approach makes it possible to achieve the interoperability
  promised by standards by getting competitors to work together. This is a decisive
  and strategic advantage in avoiding vendor lock-in, which places users in a
  position of dependence on the supplier.

 In the global IT ecosystem, the open-source community stands out for its genuine
  focus on durability through documentation and technical debt management.
  An open-source ecosystem simply cannot be viable if it is not rigorously
  documented. It is an unavoidable condition for the ecosystem to grow. Regarding
  the current open-source community, the documentation is technically and
  functionally sound, which makes the community highly accessible and allows
  certain objects to stand the test of time for decades (Linux Kernel, Apache http web              3
  server, GNU C Compiler (GCC), …). We will also demonstrate the impact of
  inadequate documentation on cost-efficiency (figure 2 to 4).

 The open-source sector also provides remarkable modularity of digital services
  and code. A striking example of this is the “PowSyBl” (Power Systems Blocks)
  project. This open-source library written in Java, dedicated to electrical grid
  modelling, visualisation and simulation has continuously improved in terms of
  documentation and technical and functional consistency for nearly 15 years. This
  project, initially co-funded by European research and innovation programs (iTesla
  - FP7-ENERGY-2011-1 H2020), has demonstrated the modular capabilities of the
  open-source approach and its relevance for the analysis and operation of the
  electricity system.

 These models also deliver long-term cost-efficiency. When common business
  needs exist, a unilateral approach to closed source digital assets is completely
  counterproductive. However, open-source projects are generally carried out by
  several parties, which allows for significant cost savings through pooling
  resources.

            RTE Réseau de Transport d’Électricité • www.rte-france.com • @rte_france
                                                          Towards European Open Digital Ecosystems

      Figure 2: Cost capitalization – buying closed source out of the shelf from vendors
      In Public or Private Procurement, when a client decides to buy a product to answer its
    business needs, he is not buying to capitalize on its digital asset. He is renting a commodity
     to a third party (vendor) which do capitalize on its own asset (without sharing value). The
                        client cannot change easily the situation in the long run.

4

           Figure 3: Cost capitalization – making closed source for your own needs
      In Public or Private Procurement, when a client decides to make its own digital asset to
         answer its own business need, inadequate documentation and/or technical debt—
      exacerbated by workforce turnover—forces companies to restart from scratch, incurring
    costly reverse-engineering of legacy code. Money spent before the last investment phase is
                                              losses.

                RTE Réseau de Transport d’Électricité • www.rte-france.com • @rte_france
                                                       Towards European Open Digital Ecosystems

         Figure 4: Cost capitalization – making open source for common needs
In Public or Private Procurement, buying development, support, evolution of an open-source
product already existing or deciding to produce it through an open-source community, ensure
   robust documentation, modular architecture, and proactive technical debt management,
 offering a shared capitalization for itself and an entire market. It also offers interoperability,
    common implementation of standards, transparency, traceability, freedom of choice for
  providers in an open concurrency, additive innovation for R&D&I phases, talent attraction
                                         and retention, …

 In a challenging economic climate, the open-source sector is also demonstrating
                                                                                                      5
  the power of innovation. The speed of innovation in open source is a proven fact.
  In particular, thanks to a much more flexible intellectual property regime, open-
  source solutions are able to reach time-to-market more quickly.

 Finally, the open-source sector relies on a genuine community, which constitutes
  an unequivocal strength. Betting on open-source means betting on the motivation
  of a committed and skilled community. It is also a strategic challenge to move
  from being a ‘tenant of digital commodities’ through the use of digital services to
  becoming an investor in European skills in this field and Digital Public Goods
  available for the entire world.

By building on these strengths, the European Commission's strategy for open digital
ecosystems can truly leverage this approach to serve its strategic objectives. It must
also remain aware of the weaknesses that characterise the sector.

             RTE Réseau de Transport d’Électricité • www.rte-france.com • @rte_france
                                                         Towards European Open Digital Ecosystems

    The open-source sector also has weaknesses that need to be addressed.
     Broadly speaking, the OSS suffers from three main weaknesses linked to the proper
      understanding of the chain of roles and accountability, weak adoption of consistent
      procurement practices, and reputation concerns.

     The first weakness is the lack of common understanding of how open-source
      collaborations operate and how to take into account the absence of direct chain
      of accountability. Special care must be taken when regulating open source. A
      good example to follow is how the Cyber Resilience Act has been adjusted to
      cope with this issue. Furthermore, the intrinsically decentralized and horizontal
      structure of the open-source ecosystem, with numerous foundations and other
      open-source project governance structures, raises the question of appropriate
      representation towards public authorities and policy making.

     Another weakness is the low adoption of procurement practices that leverage
      open-source ecosystems. Under French case law (Conseil d’Etat, decision
      n°350431, September 30th, 2011), it is possible to award a public contract for open-
      source software by specifically naming a solution without contravening the principle
      of non-discrimination. Due to its intrinsic link with innovation, open source thrives
      on competition, and public procurement law should therefore promote this
      stimulation of open source through competition.
6
     Finally, the open-source sector suffers from several prejudices linked to its
      reputation and misconceptions, which must be combated. Widespread
      discourse on open-source, especially in environments that are not at the forefront
      of IT, aims to portray this software as less secure, non-industrial-grade,
      unsuitable for turnkey purchase, even though such claims have not been proven
      to date.

    Barriers still hamper adoption and maintenance of high-quality and secure open-
    source, and sustainable contributions to open-source communities

          The open-source ecosystem is currently facing structural challenges, notably a
    shortage of resources and limited capacity for outsourcing. In response, the
    development of Found Digital Services /Providers is emerging as a key lever to
    address these constraints.
    This shift requires moving away from traditional daily rate–based business
    models and instead prioritizing long-term investment in the maintenance and
    sustainability of open-source software (OSS).

               RTE Réseau de Transport d’Électricité • www.rte-france.com • @rte_france
                                                         Towards European Open Digital Ecosystems

Added-value of open-source for the public and
private sectors
As the French Transmission System Operator, and a public sector organisation,
RTE is committed to open-source collaboration, for the benefit of its critical
activities to the energy transition.

       In the software world, open source has become a dominant strategy. Eventually,
this license enabled an outstandingly efficient governance framework for
collaborative software development across business organizations. Major
software companies realized in the 2000s that they could leverage these licenses to
organize their software strategies around remarkably efficient collaborations by pooling
the development effort of software technology components that meet shared needs,
hence enabling additive innovation and simultaneous gains in costs, time to market,
and quality.
Due to this efficiency, the model spread in the software technology and cloud
sector, and then into industrial verticals such as telecommunications and
automotive. This occurred under the aegis of foundations such as The Linux
Foundation, which provide a neutral and proven governance framework to organize
collaborations, build trust among investing partners, and establish state-of-the-                        7
art software development practices (cybersecurity, etc.).

      Thus, open source is a powerful driver of innovation, interoperability, and digital
sovereignty. At RTE, we believe collaboration is key to resilience and efficiency.
The grid of tomorrow should not be built within black boxes1; shared standards
and joint developments are essential to meet our digital roadmaps and keep
pace with the energy transition.
For RTE, the expected benefits of this open-source sector development are:
       An acceleration by reusing what exists and sharing efforts, allowing for faster
        and cheaper software development,
       Industrial-grade software with improved                    modularity,     interoperability,
        evolutivity, and shorter release time cycles,
       Cutting-edge technological and business model innovation,
       Access, through collaboration, to wider and more diverse skills and
        viewpoints,
       Reduced vendor lock-in or customer-specific approaches that impede
        velocity and cost-efficiency.

1 OSS is helping cyber crises management (source: ANSI), modeling interpretation, bug reproducibility,

AI, …

             RTE Réseau de Transport d’Électricité • www.rte-france.com • @rte_france
                                                         Towards European Open Digital Ecosystems

    These convictions are materialised through concrete collaborative initiatives:
    The example of the Linux Foundation Energy.

          In early 2018, RTE took the gamble that the open-source model could be
    transposed to the energy sector and decided to start a collaboration with Shuli
    Goodman at The Linux Foundation. This collaboration led to the creation of Linux
    Foundation Energy (LF Energy) in early 2019. Since then, RTE has played a
    leading role in the foundation as a Strategic Member.
    LF Energy is a member-funded non-profit organization whose purpose is to accelerate
    the energy transition through collaboration on open-source technologies and
    standards.
    LF Energy serves as an independent, neutral steward for transparently governed open-
    source technologies and standards that serve as the trustworthy, secure digital
    foundation for grid modernization and modern energy services.

          It was within the LF Energy that the PowSyBl (Power Systems Blocks) project
    came into being. This project consists of an open-source library for power system
    modelling, visualization, and simulation
    Initially developed by RTE, PowSyBl was open sourced in 2019 under LF Energy
8   and now serves a wide range of users across Europe. In 2025, the project transitioned
    to be hosted under Linux Foundation Europe (LF Europe), in continued partnership
    with LF Energy, to support its next phase of growth.
    Today, PowSyBl has become a cornerstone of Europe’s energy system. It is now
    actively used by Transmission System Operators such as RTE and Elia; by Regional
    Coordination Centers including Baltic RCC, CORESO, TSCNET, and SeleneCC; by
    vendors like Artelys, AIA, and Power Info; and by research institutions such as
    CRESYM and NEON Research.
    PowSyBl illustrates what’s possible when stakeholders collaborate instead of
    duplicating effort. By investing in shared infrastructure, TSOs and regional
    coordination centers (RCCs) across Europe avoid vendor lock-in, improve
    interoperability, and retain control over core technologies.

        More information about LF Energy and PowSyBl: PowSyBl – A Community-Led
         Open Source Project for European Grid Sovereignty - LF Energy

               RTE Réseau de Transport d’Électricité • www.rte-france.com • @rte_france
                                                     Towards European Open Digital Ecosystems

Concrete measures at EU-level to the
development of the EU open-source sector
       RTE broadly support the statement that “The strategy should complement
existing and forthcoming regulatory measures with policy and funding measures,
including public-private partnerships, covering the full open-source life cycle – from
development to maintenance and sustainability and market integration – across critical
sectors”.
We would like to emphasise on the need to onboard technology end-users,
including industry verticals such as energy, in the design and governance of the
short and mid-term initiatives and actions.
For instance, the launch of the European Digital Infrastructure Consortium for
Digital Commons is a promising initiative to join forces and scale up. We suggest
to reflect a model that would enable open-source programs from sectorial ecosystems
to coordinate with such initiatives.
The stake is to ensure a convergence between the common digital infrastructures
supported by the public initiatives and those trusted and favoured by digital
technology end-users in the private sector. This would ensure a higher
consolidation of efforts, reduced fragmentation and higher impact from policy and
                                                                                                9
funding.
Digital technology end-users are taking on an increasingly proactive role in the open-
source ecosystem. In the energy sector for instance, the European power grid
operators RTE and Alliander play a leading role in the governance of the LF
Energy foundation (https://lfenergy.org/). Another example is the French
association TOSIT (https://tosit.fr/) gathering major digital technology end-users in
France with the aim to support the emergence and uptake of open-source solutions
and best practices.

       RTE also believes that the strategy should promote the active participation
of European stakeholders in cutting-edge open-source collaborations with
global scope and hosted at foundations. Such active participation entails increased
contributions with leadership role in the governance, both at technical and
strategic levels.
The stake is to leverage the power of global communities (instead of reinventing EU
flavours of same technologies), hence achieving the growth of the EU open-source
sector and contributing to the EU’s technological sovereignty at a lower cost and higher
pace.
A condition for success may be to strengthen interactions with foundations in
relation with policymaking in order to ensure that the policies and practices in these

           RTE Réseau de Transport d’Électricité • www.rte-france.com • @rte_france
                                                           Towards European Open Digital Ecosystems

     global collaborations are aligned with EU’s expectations. They are key actors to
     complete the matrix (Figure 1) and the revised EU open-source catalogue.
     Promotion of vertical industry associations like ENTSOE or EU-DSO entities
     could serve as an effective lever to support open-source initiatives.

         An unprecedented European initiative was launched last year jointly by
         French and German Governments with the creation of the Digital
         Resilience Index (DRI/IRN), a strategic governance tool designed to support
         technological sovereignty. Available from 2026 onward, the index aims to
         provide Europe with a concrete reference framework to restore its digital
         autonomy by assessing digital dependencies and vulnerabilities. The French
         association will switch to AISBL status before end of 2026. All produced
         content is open source and will be translated in different languages (see:
         https://thedigitalresilience.org/). Some partners of the European Union
         (UK, Japan, India) already mention their interest to adopt it.
         Methodologically, the analysis is based on a set of quantitative criteria that
         objectively measure the level of independence of an organization’s
         information system across three distinct scales: national, European, and
         extra-European. Among these criteria, particular attention is paid to the
10       degree of openness, defined as the extent to which critical digital systems
         rely on open technologies such as open-source software, open data, and
         open standards.

     RTE’s recommendations:

      Recognise and promote the value of open-source initiatives and digital collaboration
       for strategic sectors, particularly the energy transition. Support related projects, notably
       through funding programmes that enable these projects to take shape and keep pace.

      Work towards facilitating and fostering open-source ecosystems at European level
       involving all stakeholders concerned by the programmes. Promote the active
       participation of European stakeholders in cutting-edge open-source collaborations with
       global scope and hosted at foundations and governance structures whose policies and
       practices are aligned with EU’s expectations.

      Recognise the importance of having a structure/model for the policy representation
       of the open-source ecosystem, capable of engaging dialogue with public authorities
       and private actors, in the common interest of pursuing strategic objectives such as digital
       sovereignty, cybersecurity, or energy transition through digital collaboration.

                 RTE Réseau de Transport d’Électricité • www.rte-france.com • @rte_france
                                                      Towards European Open Digital Ecosystems

 Ensure that all stakeholders are included in these joint structures, particularly in their
  governance, to ensure that open-source development remains connected to the practical
  realities of project developers.

 Enhance public procurement with a guidance to an open-source solutions first approach
  aiming either the existing EU open-source catalogue content (improved version) or
  contribution to complete it with new offer through a collaborative work.

 Ask any research deliverable funded by Europe to be Open Source, Open Science,
  Open Data, Open Standard, Open-Source AI (OSI definitions) by default.

                                              ***

     RTE (Réseau de Transport d’Électricité) is the French electricity transmission
     system operator (TSO), managing over 105,000 km of high and extra-high voltage
     lines and more than 50 interconnections with neighboring European countries.
     RTE ensures the balance between electricity supply and demand every second of
     the day to guarantee France’s electricity security of supply. Drawing on its expertise
     and central role in the electricity system, RTE conducts forward-looking studies
     designed to inform governmental decisions.
     At European level, RTE actively collaborates with its TSO counterparts within the           11
     ENTSO-E association, some of whose missions stem from mandates given by the
     European legislator.TSO’s roles in each EU country has been progressively defined
     in the Energy packages. Their creation is the consequence of the opening up of
     electricity markets by directive 96/92/EC.

                                     Contact: Julien KELLER (julien.keller@rte-france.com)

            RTE Réseau de Transport d’Électricité • www.rte-france.com • @rte_france