Ref. Ares(2026)212266 - 09/01/2026
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-025-10626-0

Public sector open source software projects - How
is development organized?

Johan Linåker1 · Björn Lundell2 · Francisco Servant3 · Jonas Gamalielsson2 ·
Sachiko Muto1 · Gregorio Robles4

Accepted: 5 February 2025 / Published online: 8 March 2025
© The Author(s) 2025

Abstract
Context The adoption of Open Source Software (OSS) in Public Sector Organizations (PSOs)
is on the rise, driven by benefits such as enhanced interoperability and transparency. How-
ever, PSOs encounter challenges stemming from limited technical capabilities and regulatory
constraints in public procurement.
Objective This study, based on a registered report, explores the organizational aspects of
development in public sector OSS projects, i.e., projects initiated, developed, and governed
by PSOs. We conjecture that the development diverges significantly from the commonly
adopted bazaar model, wherein development is carried out collaboratively within a broader
community.
Method A purposefully sampled set of six public sector OSS projects was investigated using
mixed-methods and compared with previously reported cases of bazaar OSS projects.
Results Among the cases, we note that most (80%) of development efforts typically involve
a small group of developers (<15) and rely on formalised processes. Developers are com-
monly procured from national and local service suppliers. Projects are planned top-down by
involved PSOs with funding and contributions to development enabled through centralized
or decentralized sponsorship. Projects with a centralized sponsorship have one or a few main
PSOs funding the major part of the development. Decentralized sponsorship implies multiple
PSOs being mutually dependent on each other to pool the necessary resources for the devel-
opment. All OSS are reported as being of high quality despite limited size and contributions
from their communities.
Conclusions Findings suggest that public sector OSS projects deviate from the typical bazaar
model, highlighting the need for tailored approaches to address challenges and solutions
specific to their context.

Keywords Open source software · Public sector · Bazaar · Public procurement

Communicated by: Foutse Khomh and Ying Zou

This article belongs to the Topical Collection: Special Issue on Registered Reports

Extended author information available on the last page of the article

                                                                                               123
80   Page 2 of 54                                          Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

1 Introduction
Open Source Software (OSS) has since its inception, more than twenty years ago (although
present as a phenomenon even longer), evolved from a community approach of scratching
itches to becoming an established way for the industry to collaborate on common function-
ality (Robles et al. 2019b). Across industry sectors, competitors are pooling resources and
leveraging communities to solve common problems, allowing innovation to be focused at
the top of the stack. The result is that OSS is now present in a large majority of companies’
internal code bases, as well as in products and services, and in our common digital infrastruc-
ture at large (Tidelift 2018; Synopsys 2020; OSI 2022). While Public Sector Organizations
(PSOs) could also leverage OSS projects and collaboration to make better use of resources in
developing government services, OSS uptake in the public sector has not gained the momen-
tum that many anticipated (Kovács et al. 2004). Even though many administrations at the
local, regional, national, and even supra-national levels have carried out a large amount of
initiatives to develop their software projects as OSS and benefit from its advantages, the
impact of such initiatives has so far been moderate.
    In this study, we are interested in exploring this context, and what we refer to as public
sector OSS projects, i.e., those that are initiated, developed, and governed by one (or multiple)
PSOs, either through internal or commissioned resources. Specifically, we aim to explore how
the development and social structures of this type of projects compare to the more extensively
explored community and industry-driven types of OSS projects (Capra and Wasserman 2008).
    A common means for characterizing the social structure of OSS projects is through the
so-called “onion” (Crowston and Howison 2005) model: the main contributors are the core
of the project (the “core” developers), surrounded by a new layer of occasional contributors.
In an outer layer, we can find the end users. The further from the center, the less input and
influence an individual has on the project. In large OSS projects, the outer layers of the
“onion” are orders of magnitude superior in terms of individuals compared to the inner ones.
This periphery of individuals commonly consists of users and casual contributors to the OSS
project.
    Projects that manage to grow an active and vibrant community commonly character-
ize as a bazaar, as proposed in Eric Raymond’s well-known The Cathedral and the Bazaar
essay (Raymond 1999), with light development and communication processes, fluid manage-
ment, and open to everybody to contribute. The cathedral, in contrast, is a model that follows
a traditional setting commonly found within commercial development organizations (and in
some OSS projects), which, contextualized in an OSS project, implies that a few individuals
undertake planning and development rather detached from the community (Capiluppi and
Michlmayr 2007). While these models generalize two states for how development may be
organized, they are not to be considered as fixed but rather two points on a spectrum between
which projects may transition as they evolve (Capiluppi and Michlmayr 2007).
    In this study, our overarching research goal is to investigate how the development is
organized in public sector OSS projects, and by extension where on this spectrum they may
be positioned relative to the bazaar development model (Raymond 1999; Capiluppi and
Michlmayr 2007), or if new metaphors may be needed. We conjecture that after more than
20 years of initiatives around OSS in the public sector, development in public sector OSS
projects to a large extent are organized in ways that diverge from the commonly-adopted
bazaar model. By extension, we assume that the extent to which the onion model applies
is fundamentally different for public sector OSS projects (Nakakoji et al. 2002) compared
to bazaar OSS projects (Raymond 1999) as exemplified by those originally investigated by
Mockus et al. (2002).

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                    Page 3 of 54   80

   These conjectures carry significant implications, as public sector OSS projects may not
fully capitalize on the advantages of a large developer community associated with bazaar-
style development. Moreover, it suggests that insights drawn from research and practice for
community and industry-driven projects do not apply to public sector OSS projects. Should
this hypothesis be confirmed, it underscores the necessity to explore and evaluate alternative
managerial, technical, and process-oriented approaches. To the best of our knowledge, we
are not aware of any research study that has explored this conjecture.
   We address this gap by comparing and contrasting the characteristics of public sector OSS
projects with a set of previously reported OSS projects where development was carried out in
line with the bazaar model (from now on referred to as bazaar OSS projects). We specifically
look at the seminal work by Mockus et al. who studied the Apache web server (Mockus
et al. 2000) and Mozilla browser OSS projects (Mockus et al. 2002). Their study was first
replicated (and findings to large extent confirmed) on the community-driven FreeBSD OSS
project (Dinh-Trong and Bieman 2005), and later on in the industry-driven JBossAS, JOnAS,
and Apache Geronimo OSS projects (Ma et al. 2010). To enable comparable results, we
replicate the methodology, and a relevant subset of research questions from the original
study by Mockus et al. (2002). In accordance with our pre-registered report (Linåker et al.
2023a), we adhered to the specified hypotheses and methods.
   Based on investigated cases, we find that there is no one form of development in public
sector OSS projects but that they deviate from what is commonly found in the bazaar OSS
projects as exemplified by Mockus et al. (2002), thereby largely confirming our conjecture.
Across the cases, the majority of the development (80%) is typically concentrated on a limited
set of developers (<15), using formalised processes and predominantly relying on externally
procured development resources. Notably, development is to a large extent planned top-
down by the involved PSO(s). We do, however, note distinctions in how the development is
sponsored either centrally by one or a few main PSOs, or decentralized by a wider group
PSOs that depend on the mutual funding and pooling or resources to secure the sustainability
of the OSS. Further work is needed to explore how development is organized and enabled
and how challenges and solutions need to be tailored for each context.
   Our study makes the following contributions:
 – An in-depth investigation and characterization of how development in organized in public
   sector OSS projects.
 – A comparative analysis how this development deviates from the more informal and
   community-driven development exemplified by the bazaar model.
 – A framework for future research to take point from in the continued exploration of how
   the public sector can leverage OSS as a tool in their digital transformations.
 – Design knowledge for practitioners to use when designing development and governance
   practices for new or existing public sector OSS projects.
   Next, we provide further contextualization to this study. Following, we describe in detail
our hypotheses and research questions, and their underpinning rationale. This is followed by
the research design for the study overall and for each research question in detail. We then
present our findings for each case per research question using a similar structure as Mockus
et al. (2002). Afterwards we discuss our hypotheses by contrasting between the earlier
reported bazaar OSS projects and our findings for the six public sector OSS projects. Finally,
we conclude by synthesizing our findings, and by providing implications for practice and
research.

                                                                                   123
80   Page 4 of 54                                         Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

2 Background and related work
2.1 Development practices in open source software projects
The cathedral and bazaar models were introduced early as two perspectives on how OSS
development may be generalized (Raymond 1999). On the one hand, a formal and structured
approach with limited to no external collaboration, and on the other, a community-driven
and open collaborative type of peer-production, commonly characterized by meritocracy
and self-selection of development tasks (Capiluppi and Michlmayr 2007). Since then, OSS
development practice has evolved along with the increased involvement of companies.
    The type and level of the companies’ engagement depend on multiple factors (Butler et al.
2018; Lundell et al. 2022), including their strategic interest in the OSS project (Munaiah
et al. 2018) and ability and need to contribute (Linåker et al. 2019). Moreover, for companies
developing and providing standards-based technologies there may be a stark need to engage
with OSS projects that implement specific ICT standards (Lundell et al. 2022). On-boarding
employees to the projects or hiring existing contributors with the projects are common prac-
tice (Munaiah et al. 2018). The companies collaborate with each other to address common
needs (Zhang et al. 2020), even in cases where they may be considered competitors (Linåker
et al. 2016). Their general involvement in the OSS projects varies from active and intentional
collaborations to more passive and isolated participation (Li et al. 2024).
    Alongside the commercial involvement in OSS, a high degree of the development and
maintenance of OSS projects is still being done on an individual basis (Salkever 2023; Tidelift
2024), motivated both by intrinsic and extrinsic incentives (Gerosa et al. 2021). Growing
sustainable communities is a challenge (Linåker et al. 2022), although still an aspiration
for maintainers of the OSS projects (Linåker et al. 2024). Fostering an open collaborative
development and community culture is pivotal (Constantino et al. 2023) to manage and grow
the numbers of both episodic volunteers and the more long-term contributors (Barcomb et al.
2018). Several studies (Majumder et al. 2019; Avelino et al. 2016; Pinto et al. 2016) show
how a significant majority of development is commonly concentrated to a limited few who
in alignment with the early observations by, e.g., Mockus et al Mockus et al. (2002).
    The collaborative development commonly occurs ”in the wild” through the use of social
coding platforms (Constantino et al. 2023), while increasingly being facilitated in the con-
fines of OSS foundations (Riehle and Berschneider 2012). The Apache Software Foundation
provides one example originating from the Apache Web server OSS project (Mockus et al.
2000). The foundation has, since its inception, emphasized an open and collaborative devel-
opment and governance model (Fielding 1999), still in force today (Gharehyazie and Filkov
2017; Foundation 2024).

2.2 Public sector adoption and collaboration on open source software

It has been reported that the scale of Europe’s institutional capacity related to OSS is dispro-
portionately smaller than the scale of the value created by OSS (Blind et al. 2021). Several
factors contribute to this circumstance, including the potential for economic growth, innova-
tion, and competition (Hoffmann et al. 2024; Nagle 2019; Blind et al. 2021). OSS has also
been shown to bring benefits that are particularly salient in the public sector context, among
them improved interoperability (Lundell et al. 2017), transparency (Europe 2022), and digital
sovereignty (Nagle 2022).
    The adoption, on the other hand, is dampened by challenges such as lacking technical
capabilities and competency regarding software development (Borg et al. 2018), and issues

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                    Page 5 of 54   80

related to public procurement regulations and procurement practices which impact on condi-
tions for how OSS can be procured by PSOs (Lundell et al. 2021). General knowledge of OSS
is another concern, both within the PSOs and its vendors, e.g., in terms of how to successfully
create and orchestrate an OSS community (Bacon 2012), and adopt the principles of open
collaboration (Feller and Fitzgerald 2002), both on a managerial and developer level (Linåker
and Runeson 2020).
    Extant research reports several examples on the adoption of OSS (Hollmann et al. 2013;
Ven et al. 2006; Fitzgerald and Kenny 2004), the benefits of adopting OSS in govern-
ments (Kovács et al. 2004; Huysmans et al. 2008), and how OSS technologies can be
used to restructure the public sector (Hautamäki and Oksanen 2018) and to develop new
e-government services (Kalja et al. 2007). Studies have also been reported on the risks and
critical factors related to the adoption as well as the release of OSS (Kuechler et al. 2013;
Scanlon 2019; Linåker and Regnell 2020). However, research regarding the topic of how
development and maintenance by PSOs are performed and organized, and how PSOs can
(and should) engage with OSS projects has not received as much attention, even though
highlighted as a topic in the research community since long (Lundell et al. 2009). One
notable exception regards a study of the organization of the X-Road project (governed by
the Nordic Institute for Interoperability Solutions) which has been launched by Estonia and
Finland (Robles et al. 2019a).
    It should be noted that for both private organizations and PSOs which consider strategic
engagement with OSS projects, which goes beyond “ad-hoc” adoption and use of OSS, there
are several challenges to address. Several strategies on how an organization may engage with
different OSS projects have been conceptualized in previous research (Lundell et al. 2017).
Considering these strategies in a commercial (company) context implies rather different
conditions compared to a public sector context which lacks short-term commercial goals.
For example, a PSO may initiate a public procurement project through which OSS from an
externally provided OSS project will be adopted and deployed for internal use (Shaikh 2016).
Moreover, a PSO may decide to strategically engage with specific OSS projects which are
of particular relevance to their organization, e.g., by providing bug reports or by seeking to
establish a long-term symbiotic relationship between the own organization and an external
OSS project (Lundell et al. 2017). A PSO may be engaged with some type of association
(e.g., OS2 in Denmark (Frey 2023)) through which a group of PSOs join forces, in a similar
way as foundations have been established for the governance of specific OSS projects, e.g.,
the Eclipse Foundation and The Document Foundation.

2.3 Summary

In sum, the development practices have evolved greatly from the simplified models of the
cathedral and the bazaar that were introduced in the early days of OSS. The literature illus-
trates how the boundaries between closed and open development have blurred while still
emphasizing the presence and importance of open, collaborative development. The cathedral
and the bazaar should accordingly not be seen as a binary state for classifying OSS projects
but rather as two points of reference on a spectrum characterizing the collaborative nature
of development activities inside OSS projects. For public sector OSS projects specifically,
reports are limited in terms of how the development is organized and, accordingly, where they
reside on the spectrum. Considering their limitations in resources and capabilities and con-
finement to public procurement frameworks (among other things), we expect that the level of
collaborative development is less than what is referenced in the bazaar model. Accordingly,

                                                                                    123
80   Page 6 of 54                                         Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

we use the bazaar model (based on earlier reports (Mockus et al. 2002; Dinh-Trong and
Bieman 2005; Ma et al. 2010)) to position our exploratory investigation of how development
in public sector OSS projects is organized.

3 Hypotheses and research questions

In line with our conjecture, and informed by our previous investigation of the X-Road
project (Robles et al. 2019a), we anticipate that public sector OSS projects involves a set
of users who preside over economic, decisional, and strategic power. In contrast to a bazaar
OSS project, this set of users does not (at least related to most OSS projects) actively perform
any development themselves. Instead, the development is commissioned through public pro-
curement projects to a set of developers (mainly contractors) who have limited power beyond
the ability to provide technical input to the planning and direction of the OSS project. The
developers may further consist of other stakeholders and users of the OSS project, yet they
may have limited abilities to influence the planning and direction of the project. We, there-
fore, expect a top-down planning and communication flow from decision-makers at PSOs
to developers and other users where a mix of open and closed communication channels are
used.
   With this background, we define a set of hypotheses in line with Mockus et al. (2002)
to enable us to compare and contrast between public sector OSS projects identified through
this study, and the bazaar OSS projects reported by Mockus et al. (2002) and following
replications (Dinh-Trong and Bieman 2005; Ma et al. 2010). It should be noted that a subset
of the original hypotheses have been excluded as these focused on highlighting benefits of
OSS projects compared to closed source (proprietary) software in terms of defect density
and release pace.

H1a OSS developments will have a core of developers who control the code base, and will
    create approximately 80% or more of the new functionality. If this core group uses
    only informal, ad-hoc means of coordinating their work, it will be no larger than 10-15
    people.
H1b Approximately 95% or more of OSS developments will be performed by developers
    commissioned by the users of the OSS project (i.e., PSOs).
H2a Projects, independent of the number of commissioned developers, coordinate their work
    using other mechanisms than just informal, ad-hoc arrangements. These mechanisms
    may include one or more of the following: explicit development processes, individual
    or group code ownership, and required inspections.
H2b Projects are planned top-down by a set of users (i.e., decision-makers at PSOs) who
    commission the development and communicate using open and closed communication
    channels.
 H3 In successful OSS developments, a group larger by an order of magnitude than the set
    of users (i.e., the PSOs that commission the development) will report problems, and
    in other ways partake in planning activities and communication concerning the OSS
    project.
H4a OSS developments that have a strong set of users (i.e., the PSOs that commission the
    development) but never achieve large numbers of general users engaged will experience
    limited to non-existent reuse, and a decrease in quality because of a lack of resources
    devoted to finding and repairing defects.

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                     Page 7 of 54   80

H4b The community of a project will primarily consist of commissioned contractors, and
    PSOs using, or with an interest in using, the OSS.
   To test our hypotheses, we use the same research questions as Mockus et al. (2002), but
for our analyzed public sector OSS projects:
RQ1 What was the process used to develop the identified public sector OSS projects?
      – Addresses H1-4
RQ2 How many people wrote code for functionality in the public sector OSS projects? How
    many individuals reported problems? How many individuals repaired defects? What
    were their affiliations and roles?
      – Addresses H1, H3-4
RQ3 Were these functions carried out by distinct groups of individuals, i.e., did individuals
    primarily assume a single role? Did large numbers of individuals participate somewhat
    equally in these activities, or did a small number of individuals do most of the work?
      – Addresses H3-4
RQ4 Where did the code contributors work in the code? Was strict code ownership enforced
    on a file or module level?
      – Addresses H3-4
  In Section 4.3, we describe how we answer the research questions and address the related
hypotheses.

4 Methodology and execution plan

Below we provide a detailed description of our research design, including the case selection
criteria, underlying rationale, as well as details on our quantitative and qualitative method.
    To ensure transparency and reduce bias, this study was pre-registered as a Registered
Report (Linåker et al. 2023a) after being peer-reviewed at the 2023 Mining Software Repos-
itories Conference. Registered Reports commit researchers to a specific research plan and
analysis approach, reducing the potential for bias and increasing the transparency and repro-
ducibility of research findings.

4.1 Overall research design

To be comparable with Mockus et al.’s findings, we design our research method as close as
possible to their method. It should be noted that Mockus et al. selected two OSS projects,
Apache and Mozilla, that had certain characteristics, basically that they had a large commu-
nity of developers (and users). In other words, they did not randomly sample the selected
OSS projects, as a vast majority of them are small in size and impact (Krishnamurthy 2002;
Munaiah et al. 2017), but instead larger and established projects with active and vibrant devel-
oper communities (in line with the bazaar model (Raymond 1999; Capiluppi and Michlmayr
2007)). Thus, we would first need to identify OSS projects promoted by PSOs that have a
high development activity.
   Hence, to pursue our research goal and address the RQs, we utilise purposeful sam-
pling (Patton 2014) and report on six case studies of public sector OSS projects. The sample

                                                                                    123
80   Page 8 of 54                                          Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

size is in line with Miller (Miller 1956) and motivated by the richness each case brings to the
investigation and comparison we perform. We find that the case study methodology is the
most appropriate one, as Benbasat et al. consider that “[a] case study examines a phenomenon
in its natural setting, employing multiple data collection methods to gather information from
a few entities. The boundaries of the phenomenon are not clearly evident at the outset of the
research and no experimental control or manipulation is used” (Benbasat et al. 1987). So, as
in Mockus et al., a mixed-methods approach is used in this research (Creswell et al. 2003),
combining qualitative and quantitative data sources. This offers a more complete perspective
of the projects, i) based on the analysis of publicly available sources and ii) by means of
obtaining feedback from relevant stakeholders of the public sector OSS projects.
    Consequently, we divide our design in three phases (see Figure 1):
In the first phase we identify catalogues with OSS by PSOs. These catalogues are the result
of PSOs creating spaces for collaboration. In them, software created for and by PSOs at local,
regional, national, and sometimes international levels are listed, and links to the source code
and documentation are offered. In some cases, general-purpose software, such as LibreOffice,
can also be found in those catalogues, which although widely used in PSOs does not fulfill the
definition of an OSS project promoted by PSOs. Through over networks with PSOs active
in OSS on with EU, we have identified and selected a set of seven such catalogues based
on convenience and purposeful sampling as we aimed cover a wide geographical area. We
do not believe they cover the whole population of OSS adopted by PSOs in the respective
countries, nor is it our intention to cover the whole population either.
    We collect projects in those catalogues (which sum up to more than 20K projects), include
those that are driven by a PSO, and categorize them for relevant characteristics, such as the
number of collaborators (in terms of committers and bug reporters) and amount of activity (in
terms of commits, bug reports and pull requests). The output of this phase is a list of projects
ordered by community size and activity. The list is provided as supplementary material for
the study in the reproduction package (to be found at the end of the conclusions section).
In the second phase we select six projects through purposeful sampling (Patton 2014) out
of the resulting list from the first phase. Our intention is not to choose the first six in terms
of size (in number of developers and commits), but also to have a diverse set of projects
(regarding nationality, level, and if developed in-house or not). We investigate these projects
quantitatively by mining relevant software repositories. We further contact representatives
for projects and ask them if they are willing to provide feedback on our investigation, thereby
helping to triangulate findings from our quantitative analysis. A relevant aspect for being
selected to be further studied is that they respond positively.
In the third phase observations from the sample of public sector OSS projects are quali-
tatively compared and contrasted with the bazaar cases of Apache web server and Mozilla
browser OSS projects as reported by Mockus et al. (2002), together with the replicated cases
of the FreeBSD (Dinh-Trong and Bieman 2005), JBossAS, JOnAS, and Apache Geronimo
projects (Ma et al. 2010). As a frame of reference when contrasting public sector and bazaar
OSS projects, we use the onion model (Nakakoji et al. 2002), classically used to illustrate

Fig. 1 Execution plan in a nutshell

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                      Page 9 of 54   80

the relationship between an active and influential core of developers and a less so periphery
of users in a project (Crowston et al. 2006).
   Below, we elaborate on the methodology and its phases in further detail.

4.2 Datasets & Selection of cases
We have identified several catalogues of OSS projects for and by PSOs used in different
countries. These include Italy1 , France2 , Canada3 , U.S.4 , Sweden5 , Denmark6 , and Finland7 .
   Figure 2 shows a screenshot of the Italian portal. The projects contained in these catalogues
provide the input for our first phase. The catalogues were identified through personal networks
and online searches, and are to be considered as a sample of potentially relevant public sector
OSS projects rather than a complete data set.
   The study seeks to identify six specific public sector OSS projects. For the selection
process we use four inclusion criteria (IC) for identifying these six projects:
 IC1 First, OSS that has been provided as an outcome of a software project and which
     has been used by at least one PSO during the time frame of the investigation (during
     2023). This criteria includes software projects which have been initiated as a public
     procurement project irrespective of whether the provision of the OSS to the PSO (from
     the commercial supplier) has taken place via a public development platform for the OSS
     project. However, a prerequisite for the fulfillment of this criteria is that an OSS project
     exists on a public platform even if no representative for any PSO has been directly
     engaged with the development and maintenance of the software project (which may
     have been initiated as an OSS project on a public platform as part of a procurement
     contract).
 IC2 Second, OSS projects provided on public development platforms for which there is
     some activity during the last year. This criteria seeks to exclude OSS projects for which
     there is inactivity on public development platforms that host the project.
 IC3 Third, OSS projects for which the complete source code and related development infor-
     mation is publicly available which allows for inspection of the source code and for
     creating a running instance of the OSS from the OSS project through use of OSS
     licensed development tools. Even if it is possible that PSOs provide source code under
     an OSS license for which there is a lack of OSS licensed development tools, such
     projects would be of limited relevance to other PSOs. For this reason such projects
     would fail to fulfill this inclusion criterion.
 IC4 Fourth, OSS projects for which commercial support and services related to the project
     may be obtained (and have been obtained) by PSOs. This criteria presupposes that there
     exists at least one PSO which has obtained a commercial contract with service providers
     related to the OSS project.
   IC1-2 are applied through mining process described in the first phase of our study, while
IC3-4 are manually verified in the second phase when identifying the six projects to be
investigated (see Figure 1).
1 https://developers.italia.it/en/software
2 https://code.gouv.fr/
3 https://code.open.canada.ca/en/index.html
4 https://code.gov/agencies
5 https://www.offentligkod.se
6 https://os2.eu/produkter
7 http://www.opencode.fi/

                                                                                     123
80   Page 10 of 54                                             Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

Fig. 2 Snapshot of the developers.italia.it public sector OSS web catalogue from the Dipartimento per la
Trasformazione Digitale (Italian Digital Transformation Department). Provided under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 License, see https://developers.italia.it/en/legal-notice

   The output of the selection process is a set of projects that have certain characteristics
(as discussed above) and which we analyze more in-depth using their respective source code
repositories.

4.3 Variables

Below, we list the variables that we analyze to address the RQs. We follow the same method
(and thus collect the same variables) as in Mockus et al. (2002), to make the comparison in
the third phase possible (see Figure 1).
    To gather information, we utilized the GrimoireLab Perceval tool (Dueñas et al.
2018). As individuals can have multiple identities (Robles and Gonzalez-Barahona 2005)
that need to be merged into a single one, we employed the gambit (Gote and Zingg 2021)
disambiguation tool; we further expanded its capabilities to include data from pull requests
and issues. Additionally, we identified and removed numerous bots from the analysis (Chi-
dambaram and Mazrae 2022). Tools and data can be found in the reproduction package linked
at the end of the manuscript.

4.3.1 RQ1: Development process

To produce an accurate description of the OSS development processes, one of the authors
of Mockus et al. wrote a draft description of the process for each project (i.e., Apache and

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                       Page 11 of 54   80

Mozilla), then had it reviewed by members of the core OSS development teams. The scope
of the description includes information on:
 – Roles and responsibilities
 – Identifying work to be done
 – Assigning and performing development work
 – Pre-release testing
 – Inspections
 – Managing releases
   We replicate this process by first creating our own understanding of the project’s devel-
opment process by studying evidence found on the project’s web page and repositories, and
asking related question to members of the project to validate, and enrich our understanding.
A copy of our interview questions is found in Appendix A of this study.

4.3.2 RQ2: Community size

To address this question, as in Mockus et al., we identify those who have submitted code
(discriminating between those who add functionality and those who fix bugs) and those who
file bug reports to the bug tracking system.
    We considered that commits fixed a bug when their commit message contained at least one
of the following keywords (after Porter-stemming and removing stopwords): close, hotfix,
incorrect, bug, buggi, bugfix, correct, typo, resolv, issu, fix, error, debug, fail, repair, crash,
broken, miss. We considered every other commit as adding functionality. This set of keywords
is extended from a state of the art set that was used in past studies to identify bug-fixing
commits (Capilla et al. 2024).

4.3.3 RQ3: Involvement & roles

Mockus et al. plotted the cumulative proportion of code changes and bug reports against the
number of contributors and accounted for the share of contributions of the top 15 developers
(what they called the core group, following the onion model). We also examine whether the
size of commits by the most active developers is statistically larger than those done by the
rest, and how the participation is in terms of adding new functionalities. We measure as well
the tenure of most active developers and the rest.
   For bug reports, we investigate the distribution of those who have reported the bugs, and
how much of the total share has been done by the most active developers.
   We have identified the affiliation of the core group developers by analyzing the domain
of the emails that these developers use in their commits to the release repository. In the
event that they used general service domains (e.g., gmail.com) or used personal domains
(e.g., joesmith.com), a manual search has been carried out to find out the affiliation of the
developer. If the situation arises that you have had several employers in recent years, the
dates of the commits have been taken into account when making the assignment. The core
group has been defined for the affiliation analysis, as has been done in the rest of the paper,
as the group composed of the minimum number of developers to reach at least 80% of the
activity in the repository.

4.3.4 RQ4: Code ownership

To address this question, we track those who have made modifications to files and see if only
one developer is in charge of them or if code ownership is shared among more developers.

                                                                                       123
80   Page 12 of 54                                               Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

4.4 Qualitative analysis

As highlighted in Section 4.1, we validate our investigation through interviews with individu-
als within the communities of the respective cases. This regards both the process description
as highlighted by RQ1, but also our general findings in terms of RQ2-4. Individuals are
sampled based on their social and technical activity, and their (potential) organizational affil-
iation. Two individuals are sampled per project as noted in Table 1. Further context on the
respective cases are provided in the results section.
    Online interviews lasting about 60 minutes each are conducted by two of the authors,
with one leading the interview and the second taking notes. The interview questions used
were prepared a-priori and based on the research questions and hypotheses defined in this
study. Interviews are recorded and transcribed, and structurally coded (Saldaña 2021) based
on the respective RQs. The coded data is then used to triangulate our previous findings and
used in our analysis of each project. The data further provide input to our synthesis and
comparison between the bazaar projects investigated by Mockus et al. (2002) and replicated
works (Dinh-Trong and Bieman 2005; Ma et al. 2010), and the public sector OSS projects
investigated in this study.
    The authors abide by the ethical guidelines provided by the Swedish Research Coun-
cil (Council 2017). In terms of data management specifically, interviewees’ identities and
affiliations are anonymized in transcriptions and any reporting based on the data. Each
interviewee is provided with a copy of the transcript and encouraged to address any mis-
understanding or mentions of sensitive information. All recordings will be destroyed after
the reporting of this study.

4.5 Deviations from the pre-registered report

There have not been any significant deviations from the pre-registered report.

Table 1 Overview of interviewees from the respective projects investigated in the study
ID      Role                               Org.                          Org. type            OSS project

1       Product owner                      U.S. Dept. of Energy          PSO                  EnergyPlus
2       Software engineer                  Independent consultant        Supplier             EnergyPlus
3       Project coordinator                OS2                           PSO association      OS2forms
4       Developer                          Rudersdal municipality        PSO                  OS2forms
5       Product owner                      National Land Survey of       PSO                  Oskari
                                           Finland
6       Technical project lead             National Land Survey of       PSO                  Oskari
                                           Finland
7       Project lead                       Parc national des Ecrins      PSO                  Geotrek
8       Product Manager                    Makina Corpus                 Supplier             Geotrek
9       Business developer                 Interdepartmental             PSO                  Démarches
                                           Administration        for                          simplifiées
                                           Digital
10      Community manager                  Interdepartmental             PSO                  Démarches
                                           Administration        for                          simplifiées
                                           Digital
11      Director of Engineering            PagoPA                        PSO                  IO-app
12      Open Source Program Officer        PagoPA                        PSO                  IO-app

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                     Page 13 of 54   80

5 Study 1: EnergyPlus

EnergyPlus8 is a simulation program that can model a building’s consumption regarding
heating, cooling, ventilation, lighting, and water. Target users include engineers, architects,
building auditors, and researchers. It was initiated in 1996 and published under a BSD-3 clause
OSS license in 2012 to improve adoption. Today, the software is widely used primarily by
software vendors as a component in end-user applications. The OSS is also commonly used in
academic research for experimenting and implementing simulation models related to energy
consumption.

5.1 RQ1 - The energyplus development process

The project is mainly developed and governed by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory,
together with four other national research labs affiliated to and funded by the U.S. Department
of Energy. Each research lab has general ownership of different parts of the software related
to their expertise. The University of California, e.g., specializes in energy transfer through
and around windows, which is why they maintain ownership of related models. In total,
about 30 individuals are working professionally with the development and maintenance of
the project, of which four are working full time on the project.
    The individuals are spread out across the labs, and about 20 are procured resources with
expertise within one or two areas of the project not available inside the labs. While contractors
are estimated to perform a majority of the development, about 10 percent of the development
is estimated to be contributed by the general community. One reason is that the OSS is
considered technically complex and requires subject matter expertise, which is why the
potential contributors are limited.
    The main responsibility for governance, coordination, and maintenance of the OSS project
is managed by the lab employees. A core group of six developers manages the main planning
and prioritization of features to be developed. Requests come indirectly via the project’s issue
tracker, where the community is continuously asked to vote on features. Requests coming
from software vendors are given priority as they provide a multiplier effect in terms of impact
through their distributions integrating EnergyPlus.
    The development process follows a two-week agile cycle and is considered very rigid, with
detailed processes for how a feature may be proposed and contributed. Contributions that
do come in are reviewed thoroughly according to the process, and a dialogue is maintained
with the contributor throughout the process. Minor releases are made via GitHub frequently,
typically once or twice a month, with sometimes longer periods in between. Larger releases
are typically made twice a year.
    The 30 developers meet once every week in a joint meeting to discuss ongoing work,
issues, and prioritizations. Asynchronous communication is facilitated through GitHub’s
issue tracker and PR functionality, while synchronous communication is managed through a
Slack instance. Slack and the weekly meetings are closed but open for community members
on request, although seldom asked for.
    End-users of the OSS project can procure service, either through the software vendors
integrating the OSS in their products, or by a smaller set of service providers that provide
training, technical support, and integration of the OSS based on the customer’s use case. The
service providers generally contribute through feature requests, bug reports, and documenta-
tion, although two providers are also procured to provide development through the research
8 https://github.com/NREL/EnergyPlus

                                                                                     123
80   Page 14 of 54                                              Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

labs. The procurement follows a standard procedure where a tender is published, followed
by a bidding, selection, and contracting process. New applicants are screened thoroughly
as the OSS project is highly complex. Procurement is mainly carried out by the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory.

5.2 RQ2 - Community size

RQ2 explores how many people wrote code for functionality in the public sector OSS projects,
how many individuals reported problems, how many individuals repaired defects, and what
their affiliations and roles were.
    We have found development activity in the software repository of the EnergyPlus project
for 9.73 years. We report the contributions that authors have provided in that time in Table 2.
We observe that EnergyPlus received many more commits than it did issue reports (about
3 times as many). However, many more people participated reporting issues than they did
committing code (also about 3 times as many). We expected both of these observations, since
software development involves more activities than just resolving issues, and the potential
audience for issue reporting is also larger than that of developers (i.e., both developers and
uses likely reported issues). Also naturally, much fewer (about 20%) commits targeted bug
fixing as opposed to other development. The community of developers fixing commits was
also a subset of all developers that performed commits, but only by a small margin (80 out
of 90 developers). It is worth noting that the number of authors reported in Table 2 are not
exclusive. That is, the same developer may both report issues and perform commits, and may
perform both bug-fixing and non-bug-fixing commits.
    Table 3 offers information on the affiliations of the members of the core group (i.e., those
that have performed at least 80% of the commits) of the EnergyPlus project. As can be seen,
the members of the core group are widely distributed, belonging to 9 different organizations.
Four of these organizations are government organizations and two are educational institutions.
There are two companies on the list: i) Gard, a small business corporation that provides energy,
environmental and economic R&D services and ii) Effibem, a one-man company specialized
on energy efficiency.

5.3 RQ3 - Involvement and roles

RQ3 asks whether these functions were carried out by distinct groups of individuals, i.e.,
did individuals primarily assume a single role? Did large numbers of individuals participate
somewhat equally in these activities, or did a small number of individuals do most of the
work?

Table 2 RQ2. Contributions to the EnergyPlus software project
                                                            # Contributions                     # Authors

Submitted issue reports (or pull requests)                  10,271                              305
MRs (i.e., commits)                                         26,131                              98
PR changes (i.e., bug-fix commits)                          5,813                               80
Non-PR changes (i.e., non-bug-fix commits)                  20,318                              90
Delta (i.e., changed files)                                 241,517                             98
Lines added (i.e., added lines in files)                    41,331,282                          98

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                                                 Page 15 of 54   80

Table 3 RQ2. Affiliations of the                            Number                                      Affiliation
core group of the EnergyPlus
project                                                     17                                          Total
                                                            4                                           nrel.gov
                                                            3                                           fsec.ucf.edu
                                                            3                                           gard.com
                                                            2                                           ornl.gov
                                                            1                                           bigladdersoftware.com
                                                            1                                           lbl.gov
                                                            1                                           lbnl.us
                                                            1                                           uiuc.edu
                                                            1                                           effibem.com

   To study this research question, we measured the contributions of each individual author.
We plot the CDF (i.e., cumulative distribution function) of author contributions, measured by
multiple metrics, in Figs. 3 and 4. Figure 3 represents all the code changes in the repository
and Fig. 4 represents only those that fixed bugs (i.e., PR commits). In these figures, we only
show contributions for the top-50 authors (in terms of number of commits). This allows us
to study a reasonable number of developers while still observing very close to 100% of the
code changes (for all our studied projects). It also allows us to keep our analysis consistent
for all our studied projects.
   In these figures, the X axis represents the cumulative number of authors considered. As
more authors are considered, their cumulative proportion of contributions increases (seen in
the Y axis). We sort authors in the X axis by their contributed number of commits, in descend-
ing order (as Mockus et al. originally did). Note that we keep this order for other metrics,
e.g., for the added_lines metric, authors in the X axis are still sorted by their contributed

                                   100%

                                   90%

                                   80%
      Cumulative Value of Metric

                                   70%                                                         Metric

                                   60%                                                             Authored Commits
                                                                                                   Changed Files
                                   50%
                                                                                                   Added Lines
                                   40%                                                             Removed Lines

                                   30%                                                             Reported Issues or PRs

                                   20%

                                   10%

                                    0%

                                          0   5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50
                                                  Cumulative Top Contributors
Fig. 3 RQ3. EnergyPlus project. Cumulative proportion of contributions performed by the top authors (ranked
by their number of contributed commits)

                                                                                                                   123
80   Page 16 of 54                                               Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

Fig. 4 RQ3. EnergyPlus project. Cumulative proportion of contributions performed by the top authors (ranked
by their number of contributed commits), when only issue-fixing commits are considered

number of commits. In the Y axis, we measure contributions in terms of five cumulative
metrics: number of commits performed, number of changed files, number of added lines,
number of removed lines, and number of reported issues (including both issue reports and
pull requests).
    Finally, we also plot two straight lines in Figs. 3 and 4, two capture the set of “top
authors”. We apply two different methods to identify the set of “top authors”. The straight
vertical line captures the top-15 authors in terms of their performed commits (as Mockus et
al. originally did). The straight horizontal line captures the top authors that provided 80% of
the contributions in each metric (which is how Mockus et al. originally identified the number
15 for their classification of top authors).
    We make multiple observations in Figs. 3 and 4. First, all the metrics that measure code
changes in different ways show very similar trends, i.e., the curves of number of commits
performed, number of changed files, number of added lines, and number of removed lines
grow very similarly to each other. Note that the curves for metrics other than number of
commits are “jagged”. This is because we sort the X axis in terms of number of commits, so
each newly considered developer may or may not be the next highest contributor in the other
metrics (i.e., if it is not, the curve may “plateau” for a bit, or grow more slowly than number
of commits).
    Second, the two methods for identifying “top authors” provide very similar results. Fig-
ures 3 and 4 show that the top-15 authors in terms of number of commits provided very close
to 80% of commits. The CDF for number of commits crosses the vertical line representing
the top-15 authors at a very close point to the one in which it crosses the horizontal line
representing 80% of contributions.
    Third, the community of authors contributing code and that of authors contributing issue
reports are different. The top-15 authors, who contributed most commits (approximately
80%), only provided approximately 40% issue reports. This is represented by the points at
which our plotted metrics cross the vertical straight line. Furthermore, when we consider up
to the top-50 authors in terms of commits who contributed close to 100% of commits), they

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                      Page 17 of 54   80

still provided only ∼45% issue reports. This is shown in the whole of Figs. 3 and 4. The
remaining issue reports (from ∼45% to 100%) were provided by authors that contributed
little to no code (only ∼2% of commits remain). If we continued our plot to include the
remaining authors in the X axis, we would observe the curve for issues reported grow with
each additional author, eventually reaching 100%, while the other metrics also very slowly
reach 100% (since they have little space left to grow).
    In conclusion, for the metrics related to code changes, we obtained very similar obser-
vations than Mockus et al.: a small set of 15 top developers performed ∼80% of the code
changes (in various metrics). However, in terms of issue reporting, these top developers pro-
vided a sizable proportion of contributions (∼40%), but it was not the majority of the work.
The majority of issue reporting was performed by authors who contributed little to no code.

5.4 RQ4 - Code ownership
RQ4 looks into where the code contributors worked in the code, and if there was a strict code
ownership enforced on a file or module level.
    To answer this research question, we plotted the distribution of contributions by different
authors over different files in the software project in Fig. 5. The X axis represents each one
of the top 100 files of the project with the highest number of commits. The Y axis represents
the number of commits made over the file, in a logarithmic scale (for easier display, since
it follows a long-tail distribution). Inside each bar in the plot, we use a separate color to
represent each author. The area covered by each color represents the proportion of commits
that were performed by that author.
    We can clearly see in Fig. 5 that EnergyPlus did not follow a strict code ownership policy.
None of the represented files had a single author performing most commits in it, i.e., none was
clearly “owned” by a single author. Instead, most of our represented files received commits
from multiple different authors, in proportions that were not too different to each other. A
final observation that we can make is that many authors did not commit changes to this top-
100 files (i.e., not all colors are represented). But this is unsurprising, given the large number
of possible authors, i.e., not all of them can commit changes in every file.
    In conclusion, EnergyPlus did not follow a strict code ownership policy, since we observed
a relatively balanced proportion of commits being contributed by many authors over many
files.

6 Study 2: OS2forms
OS2forms9 is an e-service platform that enables self-service and automation to citizens
and public servants through the creation and management of online forms, and the data
communicated through the forms, and integrates with services such as single sign on, and
digital mailboxes. The project was initiated in 2019 and released under the GPL-2.0 license.
The OSS is used by 11 municipalities in Denmark.

6.1 RQ1 - The OS2forms development process
The development and maintenance of the project is facilitated through OS2, an association
consisting of 80+ of Denmark’s 98 municipalities, along with single regions and state agen-
cies. Members pay membership to finance a core team of individuals that in turn facilitate
9 https://github.com/OS2Forms/os2forms8

                                                                                      123
80   Page 18 of 54                                              Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

Fig. 5 RQ4. EnergyPlus project. Number of commits performed over the 100 most modified files (in logarith-
mic scale), by each author (in different colors).

an overarching collaboration between the members, enabling them to initiate, develop and
use OSS addressing common needs. The 11 municipalities using OS2forms, one out of 25+
OSS projects under OS2 in total, pay an additional fee that sponsors common development
needs.
    About half of the development is sponsored by the pooled budget, while the other half
is sponsored directly by single members who have specific needs and want these imple-
mented in a faster pace than would otherwise have been allowed due to limits in the pooled
budget. Any new feature is, however, brought up for discussion and decided on jointly in
the project’s coordination group where representatives from five municipalities preside. The
group convenes biweekly to discuss the project’s road-map and backlog, and specific issues.
    A Jira Issue tracker is used to manage the backlog and ongoing development of the projects,
enabling interaction between the users of the project and the vendors. The tracker also enables
users of OS2form who are not member of OS2 to report issues and contribute feedback on
requirements discussions. There is currently an initiative to integrate the Jira issue tracker
with GitHub in order to connect ongoing development by the vendors, and create greater
transparency into the development for those users who are accustomed to the GitHub user
interface.
    In addition, there is a governance board with chief digital officers from four municipalities
that discuss mores strategic decisions regarding the project. The governance and coordination
is facilitated by a product coordinator from OS2’s core team with the mission to grow and
mature the project’s community to be self-managed and sustained, after which he will move
on to other projects within OS2. The coordinator has no formal mandate or vote in terms of
deciding on the direction of the project.
    Except for smaller contributions from two larger municipalities, the development is pri-
marily procured through three vendors, either from OS2 or from single municipalities directly.
The goal, however, is to be able to choose between additional vendors although there is a
preference to those who are already familiar with the project and its processes. Such dynamics
should ideally be present as the source code and all the necessary boundary resources should
be available under an OSS license, and processes across OS2 projects are standardized.
    Procurement is typically performed on a task-by-task basis where the vendors are contacted
based on expertise for the task at hand. Based on price the vendor is contracted to perform
the task and release its implementation to the public repository of the project on GitHub.

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                  Page 19 of 54   80

Table 4 RQ2. Contributions to the OS2Forms software project
                                                          # Contributions             # Authors

Submitted issue reports (or pull requests)                71                          10
MRs (i.e., commits)                                       421                         16
PR changes (i.e., bug-fix commits)                        61                          9
Non-PR changes (i.e., non-bug-fix commits)                360                         15
Delta (i.e., changed files)                               1,795                       16
Lines added (i.e., added lines in files)                  176,538                     16

The task-by-task approach is preferred before larger procurement procedures as it allows
for a more cost-efficient and agile development approach. New releases are typically made
monthly via GitHub.

6.2 RQ2 - Community size

RQ2 explores how many people wrote code for functionality in the public sector OSS projects,
how many individuals reported problems, how many individuals repaired defects, and what
their affiliations and roles were.
   OS2Forms has been developed for 3.67 years. OS2Forms is the smallest of our studied
projects, with low values in all our studied metrics. As with our other studied projects,
OS2Forms also received much fewer contributions in terms of issue reports than in terms
of commits. Also, although this time the number of contributors to each category is not
that different, still more people contributed commits than reported issues. Again, this time
much fewer commits were dedicated to bug-fixing than to other activities, with substantial
difference (about 5x). Finally, only 9 developers created bug fixing commits, as opposed to
15 developers writing commits for other purposes. This time, the set of developers that fixed
bugs represented a smaller proportion of the whole set of committers, differently than, e.g.,
in EnergyPlus (Table 4).
   Table 5 shows the affiliations of the members of the core group of the OS2Forms project.
As it can be observed, three of the four core group members are affiliated to Bellcom, a
Danish consultancy firm with business in development, hosting, and support of OSS, while
the fourth one works at Magenta, a Danish software development company.

6.3 RQ3 - Involvement and roles

RQ3 asks whether these functions were carried out by distinct groups of individuals, i.e.,
did individuals primarily assume a single role? Did large numbers of individuals participate
somewhat equally in these activities, or did a small number of individuals do most of the
work?

Table 5 RQ2. Affiliations of the       Number                                 Affiliation
core group of the OS2Forms
project                                4                                      Total
                                       3                                      bellcom{.dk,.ee}
                                       1                                      magenta-aps.dk

                                                                                  123
80   Page 20 of 54                                                                       Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

   We plot two figures to answer RQ3 for OS2Forms: Figures 6 and 7 In them, we make
similar observations as we did for our previous studied project (EnergyPlus).
   First, all the metrics measuring code contributions show very similar trends, i.e., most
code contributions were performed by a small number of authors. The curves for the “files”,
“added_lines” and “removed_lines” are again slightly jagged, showing that some authors
performed slightly different ratios of commits than modified files or lines.
   Second, this time, the set of “top” contributors is much smaller than for EnergyPlus. For
OS2Forms, 4–5 authors are responsible for 80% of the code contributions.
   Third, also differently than for EnergyPlus, we capture 100% of code contributions and
bug reporting with much fewer authors: 21. This allows us to observe the phenomenon that
we described for EnergyPlus, but were not able to observe, because we limit the X axis to
50 authors. OS2Forms had a maximum of 21 contributors, so we can see all contributions
reaching 100% in our figure for this project. A few authors (authors 1–5) contribute commits
and bug reports. Then, other authors contribute only commits and no bug reports, i.e., the
observable plateau of “bugs_reported” from authors 5–15. Then, other authors contribute
only bug reports and no commits, i.e., authors 15–21. However, differently this time, the top
5 authors that made both commits and bug reporting covered the majority of contributions
in both dimensions, accounting for ∼90% commits and ∼75% bug reports.
   In summary, in OS2Forms, a few (5) authors performed the majority of commits and bug
reporting.

6.4 RQ4 - Code ownership

RQ4 looks into where the code contributors worked in the code, and if there was a strict code
ownership enforced on a file or module level.

                                  100%

                                  90%

                                  80%
     Cumulative Value of Metric

                                  70%                                                             Metric

                                  60%                                                                  Authored Commits
                                                                                                       Changed Files
                                  50%
                                                                                                       Added Lines
                                  40%                                                                  Removed Lines

                                  30%                                                                  Reported Issues or PRs

                                  20%

                                  10%

                                   0%

                                         0   5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45    50
                                                 Cumulative Top Contributors
Fig. 6 RQ3. OS2Forms project. Cumulative proportion of contributions performed by the top authors (ranked
by their number of contributed commits)

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                                    Page 21 of 54               80

Fig. 7 RQ3. OS2Forms project. Cumulative proportion of contributions performed by the top authors (ranked
by their number of contributed commits), when only issue-fixing commits are considered

    Figure 8 shows the distribution of commits that different authors performed over the top
modified files. This time, we do see some code ownership over many files, i.e., many files show
a single color in their corresponding bar. However, we cannot conclude that code ownership
was strictly enforced, since we also see other files that were modified by many authors
(i.e., have bars with multiple colors), particularly those files that received most commits.
However, OS2Forms has a substantially lower size and age than the other projects that we
study. Therefore, the clear separation that we observe of some files being modified only by
a single developer may simply be due to the project having limited resources, i.e., with only
a few authors to contribute, they may be better focused only certain areas of the code, until
they become more familiar with the whole codebase over time.

                                     100
     Number of Commits (log scale)

                                     32

                                                                                                     Author ID
                                                                                                        66       71   76
                                                                                                        67       72   77
                                                                                                        68       73   78
                                                                                                        69       74   79
                                     10                                                                 70       75   80

                                      3

                                      1

                                           10   20   30   40     50        60   70   80   90   100
                                                               File Rank

Fig. 8 RQ4. OS2Forms project. Number of commits performed over the 100 most modified files (in logarithmic
scale), by each author (in different colors)

                                                                                                        123
80   Page 22 of 54                                       Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

7 Study 3: Oskari

Oskari10 is a platform for constructing web-based mapping applications with an agnostic
data layer, enabling the integration of various kinds of data sources. The OSS can run both
in the cloud and internally, serving several use cases among its international community,
mainly consisting of PSOs. The project was initiated in 2013 by the National Land Survey
of Finland (NLSF) as part of a general effort towards publishing open map-based data and a
general adoption of an open, collaborative mindset.

7.1 RQ1 - The Oskari Development Process

Initially, the project served as a release of the NLSF’s national geoportal. When external
interest grew, the Oskari project was generalized and improved in terms of customizability
and usability. Today, the project is relatively mature, where development mostly concerns
smaller improvements and bug corrections. The national geoportal is still the driving use
case for the development of Oskari and is performed by NLSF that has an IT staff of 100+
individuals of which five are dedicated to the Oskari project.
    The NLSF estimates that they perform about 95 percent of the development. The rest
typically originates from suppliers commissioned by PSOs with no or limited technical
resources. Many accordingly expect the NLSF to perform most of the development while
they try to continuously encourage external contributions. The modular architecture allows
for others to contribute whenever their request is considered too specific or not prioritized.
Any external contributions are peer-reviewed and supported by the NLSF staff.
    NLSF manages an informal group within the community, the Joint Development Forum
(JDF), which currently consists of eight members, most of whom are Finnish PSOs. These
pay a membership fee of 5000 Euro a year to NLSF, which sponsors the employment of
a community manager, the organization of a yearly community gathering, and technical
community support provided by the project’s lead architect. The support and activities are
still open for the wider community, though.
    Representatives from the JDF members, together with NLSF, form the technical steering
committee, although anyone can request to join. The committee convenes monthly to make
technical decisions, e.g., in prioritizing the backlog and overseeing ongoing development.
Besides, there is also a governance board that discusses the more general direction of the
project in terms of its roadmap.
    Feature requests and bug reports can be posted on the project’s GitHub site. Continuous
communication and technical support are managed mainly through a chat room on Gitter or
via issues and pull requests on GitHub. There is also a mailing list, which is mainly used
for communicating general updates and release notes. In addition, there is a yearly physical
meetup for the community during the Oskari days, where users share knowledge on new and
existing use cases.
    NLSF highlights the importance of having a diversity of suppliers in the community to
ensure sustainability and technical support for users, both in terms of development, imple-
mentation, training, and hosting of the OSS. Another reason is to avoid the risk of creating
lock-in effects, although the NLSF sits on core competencies related to the project. NLSF,
for example, tries to source developers from different consultancies to enable them to grow
technical expertise on the project, which can be used to serve others in the community later
on.
10 https://github.com/oskariorg/

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                      Page 23 of 54   80

Table 6 RQ2. Contributions to the Oskari software project
                                                            # Contributions                # Authors

Submitted issue reports (or pull requests)                  2,677                          64
MRs (i.e., commits)                                         24,892                         79
PR changes (i.e., bug-fix commits)                          5,815                          63
Non-PR changes (i.e., non-bug-fix commits)                  19,707                         77
Delta (i.e., changed files)                                 160,195                        79
Lines added (i.e., added lines in files)                    9,594,043                      79

7.2 RQ2 - Community size

RQ2 explores how many people wrote code for functionality in the public sector OSS projects,
how many individuals reported problems, how many individuals repaired defects, and what
their affiliations and roles were.
   Oskari was developed for 11.32 years at the point of our study. We show in Table 6 the
values of our various measurements for the contributions that the authors made. We observe
a stronger difference between the number of commits and issue reports in this project than
we did for the previous projects. EnergyPlus and OS2Forms had respectively about 2x and
5x commits than issue reports. Oskari shows about 10x commits than issue reports. In terms
of authors now, the difference is not that substantial. In that respect, Oskari is more similar to
OS2Forms than it is to EnergyPlus. The Oskari is very similar to our other studied projects,
in terms of how many commits it used to fix bugs when compared to commits with other
purposes. As we observed for other projects, Oskari used about 4x commits for other purposes
than for fixing bugs. Also similarly to other projects, the number of authors involved in fixing-
bug commits was very similar to the number of authors involved in other kinds of commits.
   Table 7 shows the affiliations of the members of the core group of the Oskari project. As it
can be observed, all but one core developers work at NLSR (maanmittauslaitos.fi), while the
other developer has worked in the private sector in several companies during the last years.

7.3 RQ3 - Involvement and roles

RQ3 asks whether these functions were carried out by distinct groups of individuals, i.e.,
did individuals primarily assume a single role? Did large numbers of individuals participate
somewhat equally in these activities, or did a small number of individuals do most of the
work?
   Figures 9 and 10 show the CDF of contributions for the top 50 authors of Oskari. We
make similar observations for Oskari as we did for other projects. First, all the metrics for
code contributions follow similar distributions. The exception in this case is the metric for
“added_lines”, which represents a lower proportion of the total added lines, until we reach

Table 7 RQ2. Affiliations of the       Number                                  Affiliation
core group of the Oskari project
                                       13                                      Total
                                       12                                      maanmittauslaitos.fi
                                       1                                       corporate

                                                                                       123
80   Page 24 of 54                                                                       Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

                                  100%

                                  90%

                                  80%
     Cumulative Value of Metric

                                  70%                                                             Metric

                                  60%                                                                  Authored Commits
                                                                                                       Changed Files
                                  50%
                                                                                                       Added Lines
                                  40%                                                                  Removed Lines

                                  30%                                                                  Reported Issues or PRs

                                  20%

                                  10%

                                   0%

                                         0   5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45    50
                                                 Cumulative Top Contributors
Fig. 9 RQ3. Oskari project. Cumulative proportion of contributions performed by the top authors (ranked by
their number of contributed commits)

developer 20. The likely explanation for this observation is that developer 20 (ranked in
terms of commits performed) made some commits that added a relatively very high number
of lines. Second, as in EnergyPlus, the two strategies to capture “top” authors return almost
the same set, i.e., the top 13 authors performed ∼80% of contributions, and the top 15 authors
performed approximately 85% of contributions. Third, Oskari is more similar to OS2Forms
in the proportion of bugs reported by the top authors, since the top 15 authors reported about

                                  100%

                                  90%

                                  80%
     Cumulative Value of Metric

                                  70%                                                             Metric

                                  60%                                                                  Authored Commits
                                                                                                       Changed Files
                                  50%
                                                                                                       Added Lines
                                  40%                                                                  Removed Lines

                                  30%                                                                  Reported Issues or PRs

                                  20%

                                  10%

                                   0%

                                         0   5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45    50
                                                 Cumulative Top Contributors
Fig. 10 RQ3. Oskari project. Cumulative proportion of contributions performed by the top authors (ranked
by their number of contributed commits), when only issue-fixing commits are considered

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                            Page 25 of 54   80

Fig. 11 RQ4. Oskari project. Number of commits performed over the 100 most modified files (in logarithmic
scale), by each author (in different colors)

∼70% of bugs. Finally, also as in other projects, the bug reporting activity plateaus for the
authors ranked after the top developers.

7.4 RQ4 - Code ownership

RQ4 looks into where the code contributors worked in the code, and if there was a strict code
ownership enforced on a file or module level.
   Figure 11 shows the distribution of commits contributed by different authors within the
100 most changed files in Oskari. We observe here that the contribution of commits to files is
relatively distributed among multiple authors for most of the represented files, as we observed
for EnergyPlus. However, there are still a few files that get few contributors, as it happened
in OS2Forms.
   Still, we conclude that there was no strict code ownership enforced in Oskari, because
we cannot observe in this graph a clear assignment of authors to files, i.e., there is no clear
assignment of individual colors to individual bars.

8 Study 4: Geotrek

Geotrek11 is a platform for managing and publishing tracks, signages, and interventions
within national parks. The OSS was created collaboratively between two of the national
parks in France in close collaboration with a supplier where the development was procured
from. The OSS, created in 2013, is today estimated to have about 150 mainly PSOs as its
users.

8.1 RQ1 - The geotrek development process

The initial supplier has cared for the majority of the development yet kept the OSS project
open and community-driven, avoiding turning it into a single-vendor OSS project. They
11 https://github.com/GeotrekCE

                                                                                            123
80   Page 26 of 54                                         Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

have further provided an important source of knowledge for the national parks in terms
of best practices for setting up and collaboratively developing an OSS project. Automatic
test cases, peer-reviewing, thorough documentation, and agile development processes have
been present since the beginning. Releases are performed via GitHub with irregular intervals
(between 2-3 times a month to once every two months) when new features are accumulated,
or when addressing critical bugs. Customers procuring development are enabled to perform
acceptance testing either after a release in their own instance, or pre-release in a sand-boxed
environment at the supplier.
    The user base of PSOs typically has limited technological capabilities and has to procure
services from the main supplier specialized in the OSS. Some additional suppliers have
emerged specializing in hosting and training related to the software. Some contributions has
been provided by these and some of the PSOs using the OSS, although such contributions
are typically of minor complexity. The main supplier typically has an open discussion via
GitHub, supporting and reviewing the contributor’s work. Generally, though, PSOs contact
the main supplier directly with feature requests, who then posts it on GitHub. When enough
PSOs have hinted interest towards the supplier, the PSOs are encouraged to collaborate on the
procurement of the feature from the supplier who then implements and releases the feature
to the OSS project.
    After the initial development, which was carried out through a specified tender, additional
features are continuously added through direct procurement from the main supplier. After six
years, however, a larger budget was pooled in 2019 from 12 PSOs using the OSS. A collabo-
ratively defined requirements specification was used for the tender, which attracted multiple
suppliers. Two were selected to share the contract, including the historically main supplier.
This was seen as important in order to increase the availability of technical support while
also decreasing the dependence on a single supplier. The new supplier, however, abandoned
the project after having provided the requested deliverables, including a mobile app, leaving
its source code to be maintained by the the first supplier who maintains the rest of the project.
A new procurement is currently being planned with a budget pooled from 22 PSOs.
    Parc national des Ecrins, one of the two national parks initiating the project, through the
interviewee (I7), has served the role as the main coordinator of the project in collaboration
with the historically main supplier. The park has also acted as the main procuring body
and contractor for the larger procurements. There are, however, talks about establishing a
common foundation to enable more independent facilitation of the planning and procurement
of development.
    Although the development through the suppliers has been structured, the continuous gov-
ernance is described as rather informal and decentralized. Smaller working groups help to
drive continuous discussions on needs and knowledge sharing. A common steering committee
coordinated by I7 helps to coordinate the overarching discussions. The modular architecture
enables each PSO to procure development independently. Requirements discussions are typ-
ically managed directly with the main supplier, along with I7, who thereby aligns any request
with the overall development of the project.
    Communication typically occurs through a mailing list or through the development infras-
tructure on GitHub. Physical community meetups are facilitated twice a year to further
encourage interaction and knowledge sharing.
    The community has grown organically. One success factor highlighted was that the OSS
was developed to be general from its inception as it had to consider the settings of multiple
national parks. Another is that there were only two national parks that were part of the
collaboration initially, simplifying communication and requirements engineering.

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                       Page 27 of 54    80

Table 8 RQ2. Contributions to the Geotrek software project
                                                             # Contributions                 # Authors

Submitted issue reports (or pull requests)                   4,395                           111
MRs (i.e., commits)                                          17,241                          66
PR changes (i.e., bug-fix commits)                           4,477                           53
Non-PR changes (i.e., non-bug-fix commits)                   12,764                          62
Delta (i.e., changed files)                                  61,630                          66
Lines added (i.e., added lines in files)                     1,843,516                       66

8.2 RQ2 - Community size

RQ2 explores how many people wrote code for functionality in the public sector OSS projects,
how many individuals reported problems, how many individuals repaired defects, and what
their affiliations and roles were.
    Geotrek is the project for which we analyzed the longest history. Its software repository
contains 11.52 years of data. We show our measurements for it in Table 8. The relationships
between different metrics are similar to the other projects that we studied, Geotrek contains
many more commits than issue reports, in this case about 4x. It also had about 2 times the
number of authors reporting bugs as it did performing commits to the code. Other projects
had other proportions, but all of them had many more authors of bug reports than of commits.
Geotrek also had about three times the number of commits for other purposes than for fixing
bugs, but both actions were carried out by very similar numbers of authors. This is also
consistent to what we observed in the other projects that we studied.
    Table 9 shows the affiliations of the members of the core group of the Geotrek project. As
it can be observed, 9 out of the 12 core group members work at Makina Corpus, a French
software engineering services company, relying exclusively on free software, 2 are affiliated
to BAM, a French mobile application design and development startup, and one at one of the
two French national parks that lead the project.

8.3 RQ3 - Involvement and roles
RQ3 asks whether these functions were carried out by distinct groups of individuals, i.e.,
did individuals primarily assume a single role? Did large numbers of individuals participate
somewhat equally in these activities, or did a small number of individuals do most of the
work?
   We show in Figs. 3and 4 the CDF of contributions to Geotrek. We again observe very
similar trends as we did in the other projects.
   First, all metrics for code change follow similar trends, this time even more closely than
for other projects. Second, we again observe the two criteria for “top” developers providing

Table 9 RQ2. Affiliations of the       Number                                  Affiliation
core group of the Geotrek project
                                       12                                      Total
                                       9                                       makina-corpus.com
                                       2                                       bam.tech
                                       1                                       ecrins-parcnational.fr

                                                                                        123
80   Page 28 of 54                                             Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

similar answers, although this time a bit less similarly than we observed for other projects.
That is, 80% of the commit contributions were performed by the top 11 authors, where as the
top 15 authors contributed about 85% of the commits. Finally, we again observe the top 15
developers contributing both commits and bug reporting, and then the bug reporting activity
plateaus at about 55% of bug reports. In this regard, Geotrek is similar to EnergyPlus. Its top
authors in terms of committing code only contributed about half of the bug reporting activity.
   In conclusion, Geotrek had 11 top authors who contributed about 80% of the commits,
but who only contributed 45% of the bug reports (Figs. 12 and 13).

8.4 RQ4 - Code ownership
RQ4 looks into where the code contributors worked in the code, and if there was a strict code
ownership enforced on a file or module level.
   Figure 14 shows the commit activity of Geotrek’s authors over its top 100 modified files.
We again see most bars being multi-color, that is, most files being modified by many different
authors, with a few exceptions. Some authors restricted themselves to only a few files, i.e.,
we can see the purple and pink colors appear only sporadically over a few files. But, at the
same time, those sporadic authors were not the only authors modifying those files, so they
did not show “ownership” over them.
   In conclusion, Geotrek showed some developers committing code in only some files, but
most files contained commits from multiple authors (even though different files were modified
by different sets of authors). Therefore, Geotrek did not show a clear code ownership policy.

9 Study 5: Démarches simpliﬁées
Démarches simplifiées12 is a platform for generating forms to be integrated into public online
services and managing and automating data processing. The project is hosted, developed,
and managed by the Interdepartmental Administration for Digital (DINUM) and provided as
a service to all PSOs in France. Today, the project has about 1000 PSOs using the platform.

9.1 RQ1 - The Démarches simplifiées Development Process

The project was initiated in 2015 as an innovation project through the government
entrepreneurial program Beta.gov.fr, where projects are selected and developed in iterations
as OSS. When and if a project is considered mature enough, it is brought out from incubation
and integrated into the PSO, acting as its sponsor. Démarches simplifiées was brought into
production by the French Interministerial Digital Directorate (Direction interministérielle du
Numérique - DINUM) in 2018.
   Half of the development budget is provided by DINUM, and the other half is funded
through 10-15 national ministries, pending the number of form submissions processed
relating to PSOs under each ministry. Currently, there are ten engineers working on the
development of the project inside DINUM, of which nine are contracted as freelance con-
tractors. They are procured with six-month contracts through a broader frame agreement that
covers all Beta.gov.fr projects.
   The development team follows a structured agile development process with continuous
requirements management where items on the backlog are prioritized based on need. The

12 https://github.com/demarches-simplifiees/demarches-simplifiees.fr

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                                                 Page 29 of 54   80

Fig. 12 RQ3. Geotrek project. Cumulative proportion of contributions performed by the top authors (ranked
by their number of contributed commits)

project is developed openly on GitHub but uses an external platform for the community to
suggest and vote on new features. Continuous deployment is used with new release available,
typically each day.
   DINUM has additional resources working with technical support, onboarding, customer
relations, and community management. These more non-technical roles maintain relations
with end-users and civil servants using the OSS and collecting feature requests continuously.

                                   100%

                                   90%

                                   80%
      Cumulative Value of Metric

                                   70%                                                         Metric

                                   60%                                                             Authored Commits
                                                                                                   Changed Files
                                   50%
                                                                                                   Added Lines
                                   40%                                                             Removed Lines

                                   30%                                                             Reported Issues or PRs

                                   20%

                                   10%

                                    0%

                                          0   5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50
                                                  Cumulative Top Contributors
Fig. 13 RQ3. Geotrek project. Cumulative proportion of contributions performed by the top authors (ranked
by their number of contributed commits), when only issue-fixing commits are considered.

                                                                                                                   123
80   Page 30 of 54                                              Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

Fig. 14 RQ4. Geotrek project. Number of commits performed over the 100 most modified files (in logarithmic
scale), by each author (in different colors)

Virtual events such as webinars, together with physical meetups, workshops, and trainings,
are facilitated on a reoccurring basis nationwide. On the strategic level, key contacts are
maintained with process owners and managers at the different ministries, providing high-
level input on the roadmap of the project.
   While most development is perceived to originate from DINUM, there are external code
contributions coming in on a regular basis. Of the about 70 code contributors to the project
recorded on GitHub, about 15-20 are assessed to have or have had affiliation with DINUM.
The rest originates from the PSOs using the platform.
   ADDULACT, a municipal association for sharing and collaborating on public sector
OSS projects, is one of the main contributors. At the moment of writing, the association is
working on a larger feature contribution related to accounts management, a feature that is not
prioritized by DINUM but of high value for the municipalities. Developers within DINUM
are supporting ADDULACT with the feature implementation through technical discussions
and code review. Beyond the specific feature, there is a continuous communication with
weekly calls between DINUM and ADDULACT developers, as the latter also provides the
OSS as a service for all of its members, i.e., the municipalities.
   While ADDULACT contributes directly to the main repository hosted by DINUM, a
number of PSOs have chose to fork the project, e.g., due to security or practical reasons. The
French Army and Ministry of Health, e.g., have special requirements in terms of how data is
collected and stored due to national security and personal integrity, while the Department for
French Polynesia have practical reasons and need for specific tailoring. Most customizations
from those PSOs that fork the project contributed upstream to the main project hosted by
DINUM.

9.2 RQ2 - Community size

RQ2 explores how many people wrote code for functionality in the public sector OSS projects,
how many individuals reported problems, how many individuals repaired defects, and what
their affiliations and roles were.
   The software repository for the Démarches project contains 8.32 years of development
activity. We report our measurements for the contributions of its authors in Table 10 The
number of commits and the number of issue reports in Démarches are closer to each other

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                            Page 31 of 54   80

Table 10 RQ2. Contributions to the Démarches software project
                                                           # Contributions                     # Authors

Submitted issue reports (or pull requests)                 9,720                               139
MRs (i.e., commits)                                        14,830                              71
PR changes (i.e., bug-fix commits)                         3,731                               55
Non-PR changes (i.e., non-bug-fix commits)                 11,099                              57
Delta (i.e., changed files)                                55,184                              71
Lines added (i.e., added lines in files)                   980,166                             71

than they are in our other studied projects. Démarches still has many more commits than
issue reports, but only about 1.5x. This means either that the authors that produce issue
reports are much more active than in other projects, or that its authors that produce commits
are much less active (or they produce much larger commits). However, Démarches shows
a more pronounced difference in the number of authors reporting issues (many more) than
those committing code, as it happened in the EnergyPlus project. This may be a contributing
factor to why it received so many issue reports, when compared to commits. In consistency
with these other observations, Démarches also shows a relatively large number of bug-fixing
commits, when compared to those used for other purposes. All other project showed a much
larger proportional gap between these two numbers, with the exception of Geotrek. Finally,
similarly to most projects, the number of authors performing bug-fix commits and non-bug-fix
commits were very similar to each other.
    Table 11 shows the affiliations of the members of the core group of the Démarches sim-
plifiées project. As it can be observed, 7 core group members are affiliated with the public
administration leading the project, two are part of Octo, a French software development com-
pany, one at a Sharypic, a one-man company focused on software development, and another
one at Innovative Digital Technologies, a small software solutions and iOS development
company based in New Zealand.

9.3 RQ3 - Involvement and roles

RQ3 asks whether these functions were carried out by distinct groups of individuals, i.e.,
did individuals primarily assume a single role? Did large numbers of individuals participate
somewhat equally in these activities, or did a small number of individuals do most of the
work?
   Figures 15 and 16 show similar the distribution of changes by authors in the Démarches
project, for all changes, and for bug-fixing changes only, respectively. We make multiple
observations. First, all the metrics measuring code changes grow very similar to each other.

Table 11 RQ2. Affiliations of the      Number                       Affiliation
core group of the Démarches
simplifiées project                    11                           Total
                                       7                            beta.gouv.fr
                                       2                            octo.com
                                       1                            sharypic.com
                                       1                            innovativedigitaltechnologies.software

                                                                                             123
80   Page 32 of 54                                                                       Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

Fig. 15 RQ3. Démarches project. Cumulative proportion of contributions performed by the top authors (ranked
by their number of contributed commits)

The exception this time is very similar to what we observed in Oskari: Developer #20 may
have made some commits that added an unusual number of lines, making the metric for
“added_lines” also jump unusually at that point. Second, this time the two methods of mea-
suring “top” authors are a bit different: 80% of the commits were performed by the top 10
authors, while the top 15 authors contributed about 90% of commits. Third, we again see
a large difference between the sets of developers contributing commits and issue reports.

                                  100%

                                  90%

                                  80%
     Cumulative Value of Metric

                                  70%                                                             Metric

                                  60%                                                                  Authored Commits
                                                                                                       Changed Files
                                  50%
                                                                                                       Added Lines
                                  40%                                                                  Removed Lines

                                  30%                                                                  Reported Issues or PRs

                                  20%

                                  10%

                                   0%

                                         0   5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45    50
                                                 Cumulative Top Contributors
Fig. 16 RQ3. Démarches project. Cumulative proportion of contributions performed by the top authors (ranked
by their number of contributed commits), when only issue-fixing commits are considered

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                         Page 33 of 54   80

Fig. 17 RQ4. Démarches project. Number of commits performed over the 100 most modified files (in loga-
rithmic scale), by each author (in different colors)

While the top 10 authors contributed 80% of commits, they only contributed about 21% of
issue reports. Furthermore, the curve representing the cumulative contributed issue reports
grows much more slowly than the remaining ones (that capture code changes).
   In conclusion, we again observed a small set of developers contributing most commits,
but who only contributed very few issue reporting (this time with a very large difference).

9.4 RQ4 - Code ownership
RQ4 looks into where the code contributors worked in the code, and if there was a strict code
ownership enforced on a file or module level.
    Figure 17 shows the number of commits performed to each one of the top 100 modified
files in Démarches, in a logarithmic scale. The different areas of color within each stacked
bar shows the author who made those commits. We again observe that all files were modified
by multiple authors, and thus were not the sole ownership of a single author. In fact, this
graph shows a relatively even distribution of commits by authors over files. That is, most
developers made commits to most files, and also in similar proportions within each file.
    It seems clear that Démarches did not follow a strict code ownership policy. Many authors
performed commits over the most-modified files, and did so in similar proportions.

10 Study 6: IO-app
The IO app13 provides a single point of entry for Italian citizens when communicating and
interacting with public online services. The app was created in 2017 as an initiative by the
the three year Digital Transformation project. The project was an experiment by the Italian
government in bringing engineers with diverse skillets together in-house, with the ambition
of becoming supplier-independent, and increasing speed and innovation in development.
In 2020, the experiment ended and PagoPA was created, a government owned company
focused on developing, maintaining, and providing software services for the government.
The development of the IO app was then transferred to PagoPA.

13 https://github.com/pagopa/io-app

                                                                                          123
80   Page 34 of 54                                              Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

10.1 RQ1 - The IO-app development process

    The app consists of multiple OSS projects related to the back- and front-end. The source
code is almost exclusively developed by an internal team of 25 engineers. The code base
is considered very complex, why no source code contributions are expected, or commonly
occur. The development is performed openly on GitHub where pull requests are made and
discussed openly before being merged. The requirements management with specification and
prioritization is, however, done internally up until a pull request is created. Releases are done
continuously several times a month using the infrastructure for continuous integration and
release on GitHub.
    The issue tracker on GitHub is actively used by the community of end-users (i.e., citizens
using the app), and other PSOs integrating services into the app. The development team
inside PagoPA is frequently overseeing and participating in the discussions. On occasions
there have been contributions by issue reporters, e.g., in terms of translation to local languages,
or easier front-end fixes. The decisions, and general governance of the project is, however,
made internally by the PagoPA development team.
    Beyond the issue tracker and pull request discussions there is no public communication
channels used, nor any community events held (physical or virtual). One reason is because
PagoPA does not expect the IO app to be reused as the app is tightly integrated to the Italian
government’s general digital infrastructure and public services, and because the project is
considered too technically complex for others to onboard. The rationale for keeping the IO
app available as OSS is in one part due to legal requirements, and in one part for transparency,
e.g., into how the app collects and manages user data, and by extension create trust among
its end-users.

10.2 RQ2 - Community size

RQ2 explores how many people wrote code for functionality in the public sector OSS projects,
how many individuals reported problems, how many individuals repaired defects, and what
their affiliations and roles were.
   IO-app was developed in our studied repository for 6.8 years. Table 12 shows our mea-
surements for the contributions of its authors. IO-app shows very close numbers of commits
and issue reports. This is the project for which we observed the closest numbers. However,
the issues were reported by a much larger number of authors than the authors that performed
commits. Again, this is expected in open source projects, where more people may want to
contribute issuing report than performing commits. Interestingly, despite the similar number
of commits and issue reports, only a small number of commits were dedicated to fixing bugs,

Table 12 RQ2. Contributions to the IO-app software project
                                                             # Contributions                    # Authors

Submitted issue reports (or pull requests)                   5,032                              241
MRs (i.e., commits)                                          7,749                              98
PR changes (i.e., bug-fix commits)                           1,861                              76
Non-PR changes (i.e., non-bug-fix commits)                   5,888                              90
Delta (i.e., changed files)                                  50,166                             71
Lines added (i.e., added lines in files)                     1,066,522                          71

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                   Page 35 of 54     80

Table 13 RQ2. Affiliations of the    Number                                        Affiliation
core group of the IO-app project
                                     21                                            Total
                                     16                                            pagopa.it
                                     2                                             wellnet.it
                                     1                                             governo.it
                                     1                                             progettopa.it
                                     1                                             ibm.it

when compared to the number of commits dedicated to other purposes. Finally, the number
of authors performing bug-fixing commits and performing other kinds of commits were very
close to each other, which we also consistently observed in our other studied projects.
   Table 13 shows the affiliations of the members of the core group of the IO-app project.
As it can be observed, 16 core group members are affiliated to the PagoPA company, 2 to
Wellnet, an Italian digital agency, one at the Italian Ministry of Governance (governo.it),
one at Progetto P.A., an Italian software development company, and finally one at the Italian
branch of IBM, the American multinational technology company.

10.3 RQ3 - Involvement and roles

RQ3 asks whether these functions were carried out by distinct groups of individuals, i.e.,
did individuals primarily assume a single role? Did large numbers of individuals participate
somewhat equally in these activities, or did a small number of individuals do most of the
work?
   We show in Figs. 3 and 4 the CDF for the metrics that we measured for IO-app. We again
observe that all the curves that represent code changes evolve very similarly. We also again
see the curve representing bug reports evolving differently from the other metrics. However,
this time, we observe that commits in IO-app were distributed among a larger number of
top authors than in previous projects. To reach 80% of commits, we would have to consider
the top 20 authors. The top 15 authors only contributed 72% of commits. Finally, as we
observed for Démarches, IO-app’s top commit authors only contributed a low proportion of
issue reports. The top 20 commit authors contributed only 23% issue reports.
   In conclusion, IO-app has a larger number of top authors who commit code (about 20),
but who still report a minority of issues (about 23%) (Figs. 18 and 19).

10.4 RQ4 - Code ownership

RQ4 looks into where the code contributors worked in the code, and if there was a strict code
ownership enforced on a file or module level.
    Figure 20 shows the distribution of commits performed by authors in IO-app’s 100 most
modified files, in a logarithmic scale. Each color in a bar is an author performing commits on
a file. As we observed for other projects, the majority of files received commits from many
authors. Also, while some authors restricted their commits to only some files (e.g., see the
pink author), such files were not owned by them, i.e., multiple other developers performed
commits on those files too.
    In conclusion, authors in IO-app also did not follow a strict code ownership policy, since
the most-modified files were modified by multiple authors .

                                                                                   123
80   Page 36 of 54                                             Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

11 Hypotheses revisited
Below, we discuss our hypothesis (as earlier defined in section 3) based on the qualitative
and quantitative data collected from our purposeful sample of six public sector OSS projects.
We conclude whether each hypothesis can be confirmed or rejected in relation to our sample.
Any conclusion is limited to the sampled cases and should not be seen as a generalization
to all public sector OSS projects. However, by considering the characteristics and context of
the six investigated cases observations and findings related to the six OSS projects may, to
some extent, transfer to other OSS projects that operate under similar conditions.
    For each hypothesis, we also contrast the bazaar OSS projects as investigated by Mockus
et al. (2002), Dinh-Trong and Bieman Dinh-Trong and Bieman (2005), and Ma et al. (2010).
For all but one hypothesis (H1a), these have been modified to the context of public sector
OSS projects. We are, hence, limited in the extent to which we can leverage the reported
cases in our comparison.

11.1 Hypothesis H1a

H1a OSS developments will have a core of developers who control the code base and will
    create approximately 80% or more of the new functionality. If this core group uses
    only informal, ad-hoc means of coordinating their work, it will be no larger than 10-15
    people.

Observations of public sector OSS projects The investigated public sector OSS projects
partly confirm the hypothesis that a smaller group with less than 15 developers carries out
the main part (about 80 percent) of the overall development, both through the quantitative
and qualitative analysis. However, as found from the interviews, the development teams
(despite their limited size) in all of the cases use established work practices for development

Fig. 18 RQ3. IO-App project. Cumulative proportion of contributions performed by the top authors (ranked
by their number of contributed commits)

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                                                 Page 37 of 54   80

                                   100%

                                   90%

                                   80%
      Cumulative Value of Metric

                                   70%                                                         Metric

                                   60%                                                             Authored Commits
                                                                                                   Changed Files
                                   50%
                                                                                                   Added Lines
                                   40%                                                             Removed Lines

                                   30%                                                             Reported Issues or PRs

                                   20%

                                   10%

                                    0%

                                          0   5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50
                                                  Cumulative Top Contributors
Fig. 19 RQ3. IO-App project. Cumulative proportion of contributions performed by the top authors (ranked
by their number of contributed commits), when only issue-fixing commits are considered

and procurement activities. All investigated OSS projects use publicly available platforms
(e.g. GitHub) during development and maintenance of software. This includes use of public
version control repositories and issue trackers via such publicly available platforms. For PSOs
based in the EU work practices use also include the need to comply with EU regulations for
public procurement.
Contrasting to bazaar OSS projects The rationale behind the original hypothesis is that
there are strong dependencies between each individual’s work items when working on a
common code base (Mockus et al. 2002). If these groups are smaller in size, as in the case
of the Apache HTTP server OSS project, means of coordination can be informal and ad-
hoc, while more structured processes and strictly enforced code ownership will be needed to

Fig. 20 RQ4. IO-App project. Number of commits performed over the 100 most modified files (in logarithmic
scale), by each author (in different colors)

                                                                                                                   123
80   Page 38 of 54                                         Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

enable an effective coordination with larger groups of developers as in the case of the Mozilla
OSS project. The replicating case studies of the FreeBSD, JBossAS, JOnAS, and Apache
Geronimo support, to large extents, the original hypothesis (Dinh-Trong and Bieman 2005;
Ma et al. 2010).
Summary Public sector and bazaar OSS projects share similarities in that a limited core
group of developers typically produces the main development. A primary difference lies in
the more formalised development processes adopted in the public sector OSS projects despite
the size of the core group. It is worth recognizing, however, that the studies of bazaar OSS
projects referenced in the comparison were performed in the early 2000s and that the level
of formality among these may have increased since.

11.2 Hypothesis H1b

H1b Approximately 95% or more of OSS developments will be performed by developers
    commissioned by the users of the OSS project (i.e., PSOs).

Observations of public sector OSS projects The investigated public sector OSS projects dif-
fer somewhat related to the stated hypothesis, although a large part of the development is
carried out through commissioned resources. In OS2forms and Geotrek, almost all devel-
opment is performed by 2-3 main service suppliers. In the cases of Oskari and Démarches
simplifiées, a similar situation can be found regarding procured consultants positioned in-
house of NLSF and DINUM, respectively. In EnergyPlus, the development is more distributed
among scientists and developers at several research labs, although 12 out of the 17 identified
core developers are reported as having procured resources via the main research lab. The IO-
app project stands out as PagoPA almost exclusively develops it by a team only consisting
of internally hired engineers with the explicit rationale to maintain internal capabilities to
deliver software services to PSOs and the citizens while not being reliant on any supplier.
Contrasting to bazaar OSS projects The original hypotheses by Mockus et al. do not con-
sider the affiliation of the developers in an OSS project. As reported, however, there is no
description of their contributors as mainly being commissioned by PSOs. Rather, they are
more diverse, including individuals representing both commercial and personal interests. For
the Apache web server OSS project, “the Apache Group (AG), the informal organization of
core people responsible for guiding the development [...] consisted entirely of volunteers,
each having at least one other "real" job that competed for their time.” (Mockus et al.
2002). For Mozilla, specifically, it was noted that “while the external participation (beyond
Netscape/AOL) has increased over the years, even some external people (e.g., from Sun
Microsystems) are working full time, for pay, on the project.” (Mockus et al. 2002).
Summary The public sector OSS projects more or less confirm the hypothesis that most
of the development is carried out through publicly procured resources, in contrast to the
contributor populations as reported by Mockus et al. (2002).
   One project from our sample that stands out is the IO-app, where the publicly owned
PagoPA was created explicitly to develop public services through their resources, making
up a tech company and service provider internally for the government. In other cases, the
development is either managed directly through vendors with a dedicated focus on the OSS
projects or through consultants. In the case of Oskari, an explicit rationale was that onboarding
new consultants would enable new service suppliers to emerge that could provide support for

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                    Page 39 of 54   80

the OSS project to the rest of the community, thereby increasing sustainability and offloading
the NLSF in their work.

11.3 Hypothesis H2a

H2a Projects, independent of the number of commissioned developers, coordinate their work
    using other mechanisms than just informal, ad-hoc arrangements. These mechanisms
    may include one or more of the following: explicit development processes, individual
    or group code ownership, and required inspections.

Observations of public sector OSS projects All the public sector OSS projects confirm, to
various degrees, the hypotheses based on the interview reports. EnergyPlus, for example, has
a very formal and rigid development process facilitating planning, design, implementation,
testing, and release among a distributed team of 30 developers. Inspections are required
and structured. National research labs typically own part of OSS based on expertise. In the
cases of OS2forms and Geotrek, the development is carried out internally among the suppliers
through their ordinary processes, while the PSOs in both cases have their internal planning and
collaboration processes through which they interact with the vendors. This communication is,
to various degrees, carried out or reflected in open communication channels. In Geotrek, e.g.,
many PSOs contact the main vendor directly, who publishes an issue reflecting the request
on the public development platform. In Oskari, Démarches simplifiées, and the IO-app OSS
projects, the development is in similar ways carried out internally by the concerned PSOs
through their processes.
Contrasting to bazaar OSS projects H2a differs from the original hypothesis of Mockus
et al. (2002), which considers that some form of formal mechanisms is needed when there
is a larger core group (more than 15) performing most of the development, with reference
to the Mozilla OSS project. Replicating works by Dinh-Trong and Bieman Dinh-Trong and
Bieman (2005), and Ma et al. (2010) mostly confirms this view.
Summary All the investigated public sector OSS projects report some level of formality
despite the size of the core group of developers, thereby confirming the hypothesis. The
surveyed studies of the bazaar OSS projects report these projects as mainly having formalised
development processes when there are larger core groups of developers present (Mockus
et al. 2002; Dinh-Trong and Bieman 2005; Ma et al. 2010). The public sector OSS projects,
thereby, generally share more similarities to the cathedral than to the bazaar development
model (Capiluppi and Michlmayr 2007).

11.4 Hypothesis H2b

H2b Projects are planned top-down by a set of users (i.e., decision-makers at PSOs) who
    commission the development and communicate using open and closed communication
    channels.

Observations of public sector OSS projects The investigated projects generally align with
the hypothesis, although the form differs from project to project. In EnergyPlus, prioritization
is performed top-down by a core group of six developers positioned in the research labs. In
OS2forms, coordination is managed by a coordination team with representatives from five
of the 11 paying member municipalities. In the Geotrek project, the development is planned

                                                                                    123
80   Page 40 of 54                                          Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

top-down both through a larger set of PSOs in structured procurements and continuously
by direct requests from single PSOs to the main supplier. When enough PSOs have shown
interest in the supplier, these are brought together to discuss a potential joint tender of
the commonly requested functionality. In Oskari, the development is mainly defined by the
roadmap for the national geoportal developed by the NLSF. The technical steering committee
does, however, make the overall decisions together. Finally, in Démarches simplifiées and
the IO-app projects, the development is planned top-down by the internal development teams
but with continuous input from the respective communities.
   All cases use some form of open communication, e.g., mailing lists, chat rooms, or issue
trackers, while also employing different sorts of closed communication, e.g., internally in the
cases of Oskari, Démarches simplifiées, and the IO-app project. In Geotrek, some communi-
cation is managed directly between commissioning PSOs and the main vendor, who openly
record requests on the project’s open issue tracker. The main vendor, in turn, has an internal
communication process among its own developers.
Contrasting to bazaar OSS projects This hypothesis is not considered in the reports
by Mockus et al. (2002), Dinh-Trong and Bieman Dinh-Trong and Bieman (2005), and Ma
et al. (2010). The report by Mockus et al. (2002) does, however, describe a top-down planning
approach by the core group of developers within the Apache HTTP server OSS project. In
this project, core group developers are voted in place by active participants of the community.
This core of developers is then able to “vote on the inclusion of any code change, and has
commit access to CVS 14 . (if they desire it)” (Mockus et al. 2002), aligning with the more
general Apache way of working (Fielding 1999). For Mozilla, “decision-making authority
for various modules is delegated to individuals in the development community who are close
to that particular code.” The latter signals a more decentralized approach, which, however,
may could still potentially reflect a top-down approach on a modular level.
Summary The public sector OSS projects investigated generally confirm the hypothesis,
having a top-down decision process by a set of users (i.e., decision-makers at PSOs) who
commission the development, where some communication is managed in the open while
some is done internally inside of the development teams. On the other hand, the bazaar OSS
projects may also be described as generally having a top-down decision model, although
decision-makers are appointed among the contributors based on merit and proven experience
of contributing to the code base.

11.5 Hypothesis H3

 H3 In successful OSS developments, a group larger by an order of magnitude than the set
    of users (i.e., the PSOs that commission the development) will report problems, and
    in other ways partake in planning activities and communication concerning the OSS
    project.

Observations of public sector OSS projects The investigated public sector OSS projects do
not confirm the proposed hypothesis. The communities are typically limited in the number of
PSOs that report issues and, in other ways, contribute to the projects. In OS2forms, issues are
reported by the member municipalities, and to some extent, also others, but they are limited.
In Oskari, there is a broader community of PSOs nationally and internationally who help
14 CVS was the versioning system predominantly used in OSS development in the 1990s and early 2000s.
Today the most used versioning system is git

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                   Page 41 of 54   80

report bugs or provide feature requests. This is also seen from those who fork the project and
do not contribute their changes upstream. For Geotrek, a larger set of users partake in the
reporting of issues, yet far from all of the 150 PSOs are reported to use the OSS. In Démarches
simplifiées, feature requests and bug reports are provided from a wide community of end-
users within the about 1000 PSOs using the platform. For the IO app, there is an external
community of end-users (i.e., citizens) and engineers from other PSOs that occasionally
(monthly) report issues on the issue trackers across the different OSS projects that the IO app
consists of.
Contrasting to bazaar OSS projects The original hypothesis by Mockus et al. (2002) states
that in successful OSS developments, a group larger by an order of magnitude than the
core will repair defects, and a yet larger group (by another order of magnitude) will report
problems. This illustrates a core-periphery relationship, as in the onion model, with different
layers of engagement where the number of individuals engaged increases further to the
periphery. While the FreeBSD project aligns with this visualization, the three industrial OSS
projects investigated by Ma et al. (2010) do not follow this pattern due to having smaller
communities than FreeBSD, the Apache web server, and Mozilla OSS projects.
Summary The public sector OSS projects investigated are typically characterized as having
communities with limited contributors and users. The users outnumber the contributors, but
not necessarily by the order of magnitude proposed in our hypothesis or as by the original
hypothesis in the study by Mockus et al. (2002). The relation between these characteristics
and whether an OSS project may be considered successful, however, depends on what charac-
terizes successful OSS developments. Considering that many of the investigated public sector
OSS projects have been around for some time and are reported by interviewees as stable in
terms of functionality, quality, and user base, these may be considered successful to certain
extents.

11.6 Hypothesis 4a

H4a OSS developments that have a strong set of users (i.e., the PSOs that commission the
    development) but never achieve large numbers of general users engaged will experience
    limited to non-existent reuse, and a decrease in quality because of a lack of resources
    devoted to finding and repairing defects.

Observations of public sector OSS projects The public sector OSS projects all have robust
sets of users (i.e., PSOs that commission the development), while the set of other PSOs or
organizations reusing the OSS is limited. On the other hand, the number of end-users can
be much greater. Démarches simplifiées, for example, has a limited reuse of the platform,
with only a few other PSOs deploying it on their own environments, including the Army and
Ministry of Health. Still, the number of end-users is very high, of which the majority consists
of end-users to the version hosted by DINUM.
    OS2forms is used mainly by the 11 municipalities that are working to grow the collabo-
ration. An issue with the limited membership is sustainable funding for the project, meaning
that many municipalities need to fund their own contributions directly through the vendors.
The Oskari project has a wide user base internationally, although there is a core of eight
organizations in Finland, most of which are PSOs that participate in the active discussions
of the project. In the IO app project, there is no experienced or expected reuse as the OSS

                                                                                    123
80   Page 42 of 54                                       Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

is specific to the context of the Italian government’s public services, and the code base is
considered to be very complex.
Contrasting to bazaar OSS projects The original hypothesis by Mockus et al. (2002) has a
similar wording but considers whether there is a strong core of developers and the presence of
contributors rather than users. They were, along with Dinh-Trong and Bieman Dinh-Trong
and Bieman (2005), and Ma et al. (2010), however, not able to test the hypothesis. The
rationale for the original hypothesis is that the core group of developers, with time, would
be overburdened and unable to maintain the project to a consistent level of quality, thereby
impacting its overall sustainability.
Summary The investigated public sector OSS projects do not fully confirm the hypothesis.
The projects generally experience a limited amount of reuse, while the number of end-users
can be much greater as they may typically be deployed as part of a public service. Yet, the
stated decrease in quality from the hypothesis may be contested as many of the projects are
reported as being stable, both in terms of functionality and quality by the interviewees. The
OS2forms and Geotrek project does, however, signal some issues regarding sustainability as
the co-financing of involved PSOs limits the projects’ development. In the other cases, the
funding comes from a strong entity from which the OSS project originated, such as the U.S.
Department of Energy for EnergyPlus and the NLSF for the Oskari project.

11.7 Hypothesis H4b
H4b The community of a project will primarily consist of commissioned contractors, and
    PSOs using, or with an interest in using, the OSS.

Observations of public sector OSS projects The hypothesis aligns well with the investigated
projects. PSOs constitute the primary users of the projects or with a strong interest in using
them, as exemplified by the municipalities in OS2forms, national parks in Geotrek, and
diverse set of national and international PSOs in Oskari. Service suppliers also have a strong
role in all three projects.
   Démarches simplifiées has a somewhat more narrow community, with only a limited set
of additional PSOs reusing the OSS, due to DINUM being the main provider of the public
service the OSS underpins. The IO app project also stands out as its community mainly
consists of PagoPA, the PSO developing and providing the OSS as a service to the general
public in Italy.
   The EnergyPlus exemplifies a broader community. While it mainly consists of the Depart-
ment of Energy and its research labs (considered PSOs), there are also other actors in the
community, including software vendors, service providers, and researchers.
Contrasting to bazaar OSS projects This hypothesis was not part of the original set defined
by Mockus et al. The report on the Apache HTTP Server and Mozilla OSS projects does,
however, describe the types of contributors and users as spanning from voluntary contributors
to those sponsored by companies (Mockus et al. 2002).
Summary Our investigation of the investigated cases confirms the hypothesis that the com-
munities will primarily consist of PSOs using the OSS (or with an interest thereof), along
with commissioned contractors with an interest in providing services related to the OSS.
The bazaar OSS projects surveyed by Mockus et al. (2002) deviate in terms of the reported
demographics, including both volunteers and commercially sponsored developers.

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                    Page 43 of 54   80

12 Threats to validity
As this is a replication study, the method used must be as aligned as possible with that of
the original study (Mockus et al. 2002) for results to be comparable. All six authors have
therefore independently reviewed and compared the methodology of the current and the
original studies, and together discussed any misalignment that could be identified.
    Certain differences in design decisions do however apply, e.g., in terms of case sampling.
Beyond the fact that the two cases of the original study (Mockus et al. 2002) had large and
vibrant communities, the authors chose their cases also because they had personal experience
and rootings in their respective communities. In our study, we are specifically interested in
characterizing public sector OSS projects, and how these may differ from bazaar OSS projects,
such as those investigated in the original study. To avoid any bias in our sampling, we have
mined software catalogues listing OSS projects used and developed by PSOs in different
countries. Six different types of projects have been selected based on our defined inclusion
criteria
    As the sample is limited, we do not claim that the results are generalizable. Rather, we
have provided a contextual description of what we refer to as public sector OSS projects and
exemplify how their development model (may) differ from that of bazaar OSS projects in
general and the commonly used and associated onion model. Through both our qualitative
and quantitative investigations of the projects, we have offered in-depth characterisations of
the six projects to enable transferability to cases with similar characteristics. Considerations
of generalization is an open topic for future work.
    In contrast to the original study, we do not expect to have in-depth knowledge of the
six cases to be sampled. Hence, to limit the risk of research bias and misinterpretations of
observations, we have allowed community representatives to review and criticize our findings
(RQ1 specifically, and RQ2-4 in general).
    Another threat regards the construct validity of our study - if what we consider as bazaar
projects instantiated in the cases of the Apache web server and Mozilla browser OSS projects
is still valid today. The report by Mockus et al. (2002) dates from 2002, and practices and
processes may have evolved, why it may be considered relevant to revisit the two communities
and how they currently work. However, as this is a replication study, we are limited to
using the reporting by Mockus et al. (2002) as our baseline. Further, we note that the study
by Mockus et al. (2002) has been replicated and generalized by several studies through the
years (see Dinh-Trong and Bieman (2005); Ma et al. (2010)) since its reporting. Thus, we
still consider it a valid representation of what we consider as a bazaar project. Further, we
have included these replications of Mockus et al. (2002) into the comparison between the
public sector and bazaar OSS projects to get further nuance of what characterizes a bazaar
project.
    It should be further noted, that our comparative analysis has focused on the public sector
OSS projects sampled, and the bazaar model as represented by the replicated case stud-
ies (Mockus et al. 2002; Dinh-Trong and Bieman 2005; Ma et al. 2010). Any statements in
regards to the cathedral model is anecdotal and left for the analysis and discussion of our
findings.
    Continuing, we do not claim that the bazaar and cathedral model are represents a binary
state for how OSS projects may be categorized. Rather they represent a two points on a
spectrum where projects may transition between as they evolve (Capiluppi and Michlmayr
2007). This study has focused on characterizing public sector OSS projects, taking point
from the conjecture that they deviate from the bazaar development model as exemplified
by replicated case studies (Mockus et al. 2002; Dinh-Trong and Bieman 2005; Ma et al.

                                                                                    123
80   Page 44 of 54                                       Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

2010). Our findings indicate support for this conjecture, and also shows how development
also differs between public sector OSS projects. Generalizations should, also in this regard,
be considered as points of reference on a spectrum from which we can continue our research
and advice practitioners.

13 Discussion and conclusions
In this study, we explored the phenomenon of public sector OSS projects and how code
development is organized in this subset. Our original conjecture was that the developments
are, to a large extent, organized in ways that diverge from the open collaborative approach
illustrated by the bazaar model, and taking point from the case studies by Mockus et al.
(2002) and replicating studies (Dinh-Trong and Bieman 2005; Ma et al. 2010). Our study is
based on a Registered Report (Linåker et al. 2023a) where we specified our research goals,
hypotheses, and design, ensuring transparency and reproducibility. Below, we discuss and
conclude our findings in terms of this conjecture.

13.1 Development organized outside of the bazaar
Based on our mixed-methods analysis of six cases of public sector OSS projects, we observe
significant deviations from the characteristics typically associated with the reference bazaar
OSS projects (Mockus et al. 2002; Dinh-Trong and Bieman 2005; Ma et al. 2010). Instead,
the organizational aspects of public sector OSS projects appear to align more closely with
earlier descriptions of the cathedral model (Capiluppi and Michlmayr 2007).
Concentrated development with external resources The major part (80 percent) of devel-
opment is typically concentrated on a group of 5-15 developers, something which is in line
with research on the broader OSS ecosystem (Pinto et al. 2016; Avelino et al. 2016; Majumder
et al. 2019). These developers are, for the most part, originating from national and local ser-
vice providers, which may indicate a preference for suppliers with whom PSOs can have
a more personal and trusted relationship, something that was especially highlighted in the
cases of OS2forms and Geotrek. This national and local preference aligns with investigations
highlighting how increased public investment into OSS contributes to increased growth and
competition of business and entrepreneurship in OSS (Nagle 2019; Blind et al. 2021).
Formal development methods and high quality software Another general note was
the use of formally defined development and quality assurance processes and means of
coordination commonly found in professional settings, including OSS projects with high
levels of commercial involvement (Li et al. 2024), and again characteristic to the Cathedral
model (Capiluppi and Michlmayr 2007). Explanations can be found in the reports on how
the development in all cases was performed within or between PSOs and service suppliers
by professional developers sponsored by the involved PSOs. By extension, this may also
provide explanations for the high quality and stability of the OSS developed in the respective
projects despite the limited size and contributions from their respective communities.
Deviation in sponsorship of OSS development We did, however, note some important
deviations among the cases. Specifically, we observe two clusters of public sector OSS
projects in terms of how the development is sponsored by the involved PSOs: Centralized or
Decentralized sponsorship (see Table 14). While these two clusters represent generalizations
based on our sampled projects, these can be considered part of a continuum in terms of how
development is funded or performed among the involved PSOs.

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                              Page 45 of 54   80

Table 14 Overview of how the organization of development of public sector OSS projects differs and overlaps
among the investigated cases
                             Centralized sponsorship                  Decentralized sponsorship

Cases                        Démarches simplifiées,      IO   app,    OS2forms, Geotrek
                             Oskari, EnergyPlus
Community population         Community consisting of one or few       Community consisting of multiple
                             main PSOs and a smaller set of actors,   PSOs, along with service suppliers.
                             primarily consisting of PSOs using the
                             OSS (or with an interest thereof) and
                             related service suppliers.
Contributors                 Main development is sponsored by         Multiple PSOs pool resources and
                             one or few main PSOs either through      funding to sponsor the development
                             internal or procured resources, while    through joint or direct procurement of
                             external contributions occur and are     development from service providers.
                             promoted to various degrees depen-
                             dent on the OSS complexity and use
                             case, as well as inventive for being
                             released.
Planning                     Performed under the leadership of one    Performed collaboratively by those
                             or a few main PSOs sponsoring the        PSOs sponsoring the development
                             development, with more or less input     with input from other users.
                             from the community.
Development distribution     The major part (80 percent) of devel-
                             opment is typically concentrated to a
                             group of 5-15 developers, typically by
                             national and local service providers.
Development processes        Developers use formally defined
                             development and quality assurance
                             processes and means of coordination
                             commonly found in professional set-
                             tings.
Software quality             The OSS produced by the respective
                             communities are reported as being
                             generally stable and of high quality.
Sustainability               Dependent on the development spon-       Dependent on the collective funding
                             sored by the main PSOs.                  or contributions by involved PSOs.

13.1.1 Centralized sponsorship:

Oskari, Démarches simplifiées, the IO app, and EnergyPlus, represent different nuances of
public sector OSS projects with a centralized sponsorship, implying that the main develop-
ment is carried out or sponsored by, and in extension dependent on, one or a few resourceful
PSOs. The OSS typically also originates from these main PSOs, showing similarities to
vendor-led OSS projects. In the latter, the development is steered and sponsored mainly by
software-intensive organizations aiming to employ OSS as a building block or platform for
commercial products and services (Yavuz et al. 2022). In the context of our surveyed cases,
however, the OSS would rather serve as an input for public products and services developed
and provided by the respective PSOs.
Business-critical for the main sponsor In all cases, the OSS serves a business-critical
use case warranting the dedicated development and sponsorship of the projects to ensure
their sustainability. In the Démarches simplifiées and the IO app OSS projects, DINUM and

                                                                                               123
80   Page 46 of 54                                        Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

PagoPA, respectively, use the OSS as a foundation for public services, in each case directed
to public servants and citizens in the concerned countries. The Oskari OSS serves as the
foundation for the national geoportal provided by the NLSF in Finland, and EnergyPlus as
a tool for enabling simulation and research on a building’s consumption regarding heating,
cooling, ventilation, lighting, and water. Hence, the two PSOs have dedicated funding and
resources to ensure the sustainability and quality of the respective OSS projects.
Community size dependent on use case and complexity The size and role of the commu-
nity, however, differs somewhat between the projects. When the codebase complexity and
use case of the OSS are limited, as in the case of the IO app, community size is limited. The
IO app is reported as being complex and specific for the infrastructure of PagoPA, where
the main use case is tied to the public service provided by the PSO. In contrast, the Oskari
and EnergyPlus projects both have a more general use case where the sponsoring PSOs see
a value in the potential for open innovation an active community can bring (Munaiah et al.
2018).
Rationale for open sourcing connected to reuse and community size The rationale
for releasing the software as OSS differs across the cases, and relates to the potential for
reuse and community growth of the OSS project. The release and public development of
the IO app is mainly due to legal requirements and to provide transparency into how the
application, e.g., uses and collects data. Similar rationales can be found across policies in
several countries (Blind et al. 2021), implying that there is less focus on enabling general
reuse. For Oskari and EnergyPlus, there are more explicit intentions of growing a community
to enable collaborative development and reuse.
Sustainability dependent on a central PSO From a sustainability and community point
of view, the high level of dependence on a central PSO poses a risk for the communities of
Oskari and EnergyPlus. A refactoring or change in business scope may imply that the OSS
projects risk becoming unmaintained (Linåker et al. 2022).

13.1.2 Decentralized sponsorship

OS2forms and Geotrek represent cases where multiple PSOs collaborate through the pooling
of resources that sponsor the development, commonly procured from service providers.
Similarities can be found in the user-driven foundations as characterized by Yavuz et al. (2022)
where development is mainly directed and sponsored by software-intensive organizations
addressing internal use-cases, or the building of non-commercial (e.g., public) services.
Development through collaborative procurement of suppliers In OS2forms, 11 munic-
ipalities collaborate and co-fund the development from a smaller set of service suppliers.
The OSS project is hosted under the Danish national OS2 association (Frey 2023), which
serves as a steward for 25+ public sector OSS projects, with various participation among
80+ municipal members. In Geotrek, a smaller set of national parks and PSOs (of about 150
users) collaborate through joint or direct procurement of development from a main service
supplier.
Sustainability dependent on collective funding In terms of sustainability, there is a depen-
dency among the PSOs in the respective communities in collecting the necessary funds to
sponsor the development. While both projects are reported as stable, there is still an expressed
need to scale the community in terms of paying members to ensure the sustainability of the
projects. Observations align with general literature where funding is a generally highlighted

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                    Page 47 of 54   80

challenge for the health and sustainability of OSS projects (Linåker et al. 2022). A difference
is, however, that there already exists an incentive among the users of the OSS to pay for its
development, whereas many smaller projects maintained by individuals struggle to achieve
any form of sponsorship for their work (Linåker et al. 2024).
Sustainability dependent on the presence of service suppliers A second factor is the
dependence on service suppliers, which can threaten sustainability should they stop providing
services for whatever reason. The threat can be compared to sensitivity if OSS projects are
maintained by a single organization or individual who abandons a project, e.g., due to internal
re-factorization or change of interest (Linåker et al. 2022). Here, the general lack of internal
capabilities (Borg et al. 2018) and dependence on outsourcing (Marco-Simó and Pastor-
Collado 2020) becomes a liability

13.1.3 Addressing sustainability challenges

Addressing the sustainability challenges highlighted across the surveyed cases is critical for
the PSOs. Below, we discuss potential actions based on findings and literature that may help.
Sharing and disseminating critical knowledge for development When development is
limited to a few PSOs or service providers, it is critical to ensure that all the necessary
knowledge and tools needed to develop and deploy the OSS are openly available (Linåker
et al. 2024). The presence of the necessary documentation concerning how to develop, build,
and deploy the OSS; a development and build environment based on OSS tools; presence
and high coverage of test cases; and overview of and access to dependencies are critical to
enable others to potentially take over the maintenance (Persson and Linåker 2024).
Facilitating development through Open Source Stewards Another means of improving
robustness is through the organization of concerned PSOs through associations such as OS2,
comparable to the foundations commonly used for hosting and collaborating on OSS projects
in the broader OSS ecosystem (Riehle and Berschneider 2012). These make up a type of Open
Source Steward (a term recently introduced by the European Cyber Resilience Act) that may
help to create standardized development processes and governance structures and maintain
a broader ecosystem of potential users and service suppliers that join communities as they
grow beyond early adopters and prove value and potential. The X-Road provides a successful
example of how such stewardship can be set up in a cross-border context (Robles et al. 2019a).

Growing institutional capabilities through Open Source Program Offices Growing and
providing internal capabilities and expertize within PSOs for OSS adoption within PSOs
is another approach for increasing robustness, also highlighted in literature (Van Loon and
Toshkov 2015; Shaikh 2016). This is commonly performed through the creation of dedicated
support functions referred to as Open Source Program Offices (OSPOs) (Munir and Mols
2021). For less resourceful PSOs, associations (or stewards) such as OS2 can be a source of
corresponding support (Linåker et al. 2023b).
Growing a competitive ecosystem of service suppliers Availability of multiple service
providers increases robustness (Koloniaris et al. 2018), while decreasing the risk of ending
up in a vendor lock-in (Persson and Linåker 2024). Limited availability of support is, how-
ever, a commonly reported challenges (Koloniaris et al. 2018; Deller and Guilloux 2008).
OS2 presents an approach where they have organically grown an ecosystem of 60+ service

                                                                                    123
80   Page 48 of 54                                          Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

suppliers, working actively to enable sustainable business models, e.g., through conscious
license selection and open collaboration Frey (2023).
Growing community and collaborative culture Funding is a general sustainability chal-
lenge for OSS project maintainers (Linåker et al. 2022), where various models ranging from
sponsorship to entrepreneurship and employment have been proposed (Linåker et al. 2024).
For the public sector OSS projects, however, funding is dependent on the PSOs using the
OSS. Hence, there is a need to minimize the (potential) “free-riding” and grow a collaborative
culture where PSOs are inclined to contribute to the common development.

13.2 Concluding remarks and future work

Our investigation largely confirms our initial conjecture that the development in public sector
OSS projects to a large extent are organized in ways that diverge from the open collaborative
and community-driven approach illustrated by the bazaar model as reported in earlier case
studies (Mockus et al. 2002; Dinh-Trong and Bieman 2005; Ma et al. 2010). However, rather
than one consistent model we observe several nuances in how development in public sector
OSS projects is organized.
   The development (80%) is typically centered to a limited set of developers (<15). Formal
methods are predominantly used through externally procured development resources, while
the development is largely planned top-down by the involved PSO(s). A distinction is made
between centralized and decentralized sponsorship of the development is sponsored. In the
former, development is mainly funded centrally by one or a few main PSOs, and in the latter
by a wider group PSOs that depend on the mutual funding and pooling or resources to secure
the sustainability of the OSS.

13.2.1 Implications for research

Our study contributes i) an in-depth investigation and characterization of how development
in organized in public sector OSS projects, ii) a comparative analysis how this development
deviates from the more informal and community-driven development exemplified by the
bazaar model, and iii) a framework for future research to take point from in the continued
exploration of how the public sector can leverage OSS as a tool in their digital transformations
(see table 14).
   Still, our investigation is only a partial characterization of all public sector OSS projects as
we have investigated a limited sample of six projects, with a relatively limited investigation of
two interviews per project. Further data collection could have provided a richer interpretation
of the projects and their communities. This is an essential aspect as the projects cannot only
be defined by our quantitative analysis of the respective software repositories used by the
communities in developing the OSS. As interviews showed, much communication is carried
out among and between PSOs and service suppliers, and not always turning up in the open
infrastructure and software repositories of the concerned projects.
   Future work should expand on the quantitative and qualitative investigation of public sector
OSS projects. The repositories we leveraged to identify our sample of cases can provide a
starting point to gain a greater understanding of the organization, development, and output
of these projects. Further, more in-depth qualitative studies are needed to understand the
complexities and challenges experienced by these projects. Based on our own analysis, we
conjecture that such complexities and challenges will differ based on how the development

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                   Page 49 of 54   80

is organized in the public sector OSS project at hand. Therefore, any solutions and guidelines
may also need to be tailored to the specific context. Further research will probably also
identify additional ways in which development is organized that may need to be considered,
distinct from or overlapping with those identified in this study.

13.2.2 Implications for practitioners

Our study contributes design knowledge for practitioners to use when designing development
and governance practices for new or existing public sector OSS projects. Specifically, PSOs
and service suppliers in any way leading or partaking in the collaboration on a public sector
OSS project, should consider how development is organized in their context and contrast
with the investigated cases.
    The case investigations highlight several areas that guidelines and practical support for
practitioners need to consider. For example, the potentially limited community support and
reuse for public sector OSS projects due to complexity and limited use case. Dependencies and
the willingness of PSOs to fund the development and maintenance of the OSS projects need
care to ensure long term sustainability, and by extension attractiveness of the OSS projects.
Guidelines should specifically consider how public procurement process and collaboration
possibilities can integrate across PSOs and with service suppliers due to the reliance on
external development resources. Governance structures, co-funding models, and organization
of the collaborations between public and private entities further need practical consideration.
Open Source Stewards as the Danish OS2 can provide neutral grounds for hosting and
facilitation of collaborations between PSOs and bridge gaps toward service suppliers. The
creation of Open Source Program Offices can help to grow the internal capabilities of the
PSOs so that they can adopt and collaborate on the OSS as needed.
    While our investigation is brief, each case reports on several means of collaborating and
organizing the development within a project that can help guide practice. Further investigation
should, however, be put into evaluating different development practices as those reported in
the investigated cases. Such evaluation has been beyond the scope of this study.

Appendix A - Interview questions

 – Can you briefly describe your current role and organization, and your connection and
   responsibility in relation to the OSS project?
 – Can you please describe and characterize the community of users of OSS from the OSS
   project, e.g., in terms of public and private actors?
 – What types of public sector organizations have adopted and use OSS from the OSS
   project? Can you provide any examples of users?
 – Can you please describe and elaborate on key roles and responsibilities for the OSS
   project, e.g., in terms of governance, development, and maintenance?
 – Can you please describe and elaborate on how strategic decisions are made concerning
   maintenance and future development of the OSS project?
 – How do developers obtain information concerning feature requests and bug reports from
   public sector organizations that have adopted and use OSS from the OSS project?
 – Can you please describe the overarching development and release process used in the
   OSS project? How is the work coordinated? Is communication managed in open or closed
   settings?

                                                                                    123
80   Page 50 of 54                                                   Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

 – Who are involved in the development and maintenance of the OSS project? How
   would you characterize the distribution in work between different actors? Are tasks
   procured/commissioned in any way?
      – Can you please describe the process during which OSS from the OSS project has
        been procured (e.g., has there been a public procurement process? Has the public
        sector organization a support contract for the OSS project?)
      – Can you please describe a typical process during which OSS from the OSS project
        is procured by a public sector organization?
      – Are you aware of any public sector organizations that have undertaken a public
        procurement process for OSS from the OSS project according to applicable public
        procurement regulations?
 – Are you aware of any public sector organizations that have a support contract for OSS
   from the OSS project?

Acknowledgements We would like to thank all of the interviewees for their valuable contribution, which
without this research would not be possible. The research of G.Robles has been funded by the Spanish Ministry
of Science, Innovation, and Universities under the Excellence Network AI4Software (Red2022-134647-T) and
the Dependentium project (PID2022-139551NB-I00). The work of Francisco Servant was partially funded
by the United States National Science Foundation (NSF) under award CCF-2046403, by Virginia Tech under
a startup grant, by Universidad Rey Juan Carlos under the International Distinguished Researcher award
C01INVESDIST, and by the Spanish Agencia Estatal de Investigación under award PID2022-142964OA-I00.

Funding Open access funding provided by RISE Research Institutes of Sweden.

Data Availability Statement We have made the research artifacts and some material from the quantitative
investigation for our paper available. It can be accessed at an online repositoryhttps://zenodo.org/doi/10.
5281/zenodo.10696435. Qualitative data is not published per agreement with interviewees to preserve their
anonymity.

Declarations

Conflicts of Interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References
Avelino G, Passos L, Hora A, Valente MT (2016) A novel approach for estimating truck factors. In: 2016
     IEEE 24th International Conference on Program Comprehension (ICPC), pp. 1–10. IEEE
Bacon J (2012) The art of community: Building the new age of participation. O’Reilly Media, Inc
Barcomb A, Kaufmann A, Riehle D, Stol KJ, Fitzgerald B (2018) Uncovering the periphery: A qualitative
     survey of episodic volunteering in free/libre and open source software communities. IEEE Trans Software
     Eng 46(9):962–980
Benbasat I, Goldstein DK, Mead M (1987) The case research strategy in studies of information systems. MIS
     quarterly pp. 369–386

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                               Page 51 of 54   80

Blind K, Böhm M, Grzegorzewska P, Katz A, Muto S, Pätsch S, Schubert T (2021) The impact of open
     source software and hardware on technological independence, competitiveness and innovation in the eu
     economy. Final Study Report. European Commission, Brussels 10:430161
Borg M, Olsson T, Franke U, Assar S (2018) Digitalization of swedish government agencies-a perspective
     through the lens of a software development census. In: 2018 IEEE/ACM 40th International Conference
     on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Society (ICSE-SEIS), pp. 37–46. IEEE
Butler S, Gamalielsson J, Lundell B, Jonsson P, Sjöberg J, Mattsson A, Rickö N, Gustavsson T, Feist J,
     Landemoo S et al (2018) An investigation of work practices used by companies making contributions
     to established OSS projects. In: Proceedings of the 40th Intl Conf on Software Engineering: Software
     Engineering in Practice, pp. 201–210. ACM
Capilla R, Salamanca V, Valdezate A, Robles G (2024) Can instability variations warn developers when
     open-source projects boost? Empir Softw Eng 29(4):97
Capiluppi A, Michlmayr M (2007) From the cathedral to the bazaar: An empirical study of the lifecycle of
     volunteer community projects. In: IFIP International Conference on Open Source Systems, pp. 31–44.
     Springer
Capra E, Wasserman AI (2008) A Framework for Evaluating Managerial Styles in Open Source Projects. In:
     Russo B, Damiani E, Hissam S, Lundell B, Succi G (eds) Open Source Development, Communities and
     Quality. Springer, US, Boston, MA, pp 1–14
Chidambaram N, Mazrae PR (2022) Bot detection in github repositories. In: Proceedings of the 19th Interna-
     tional Conference on Mining Software Repositories, pp. 726–728
Constantino K, Souza M, Zhou S, Figueiredo E, Kästner C (2023) Perceptions of open-source software
     developers on collaborations: An interview and survey study. Journal of Software: Evolution and Process
     35(5):e2393
Council SR (2017) God forskningsed. Swedish Research Council
Creswell JW, Plano Clark VL, Gutmann ML, Hanson WE (2003) Advanced mixed methods research designs.
     Handbook of mixed methods in social and behavioral research 209(240):209–240
Crowston K, Howison J (2005) The social structure of open source software development teams. First Monday
     10(2)
Crowston K, Wei K, Li Q, Howison J (2006) Core and periphery in free/libre and open source software
     team communications. In: Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System
     Sciences (HICSS’06), vol. 6, pp. 118a–118a. IEEE
Deller R, Guilloux V (2008) Open source software movement in the french central and local government: A
     retrospective and prospective exploratory study. International Journal of Electronic Democracy 1(1):1–13
Dinh-Trong TT, Bieman JM (2005) The freebsd project: A replication case study of open source development.
     IEEE Trans Software Eng 31(6):481–494
Dueñas S, Cosentino V, Robles G, Gonzalez-Barahona JM (2018) Perceval: Software project data at your will.
     In: 40th ICSE Companion Proc, pp. 1–4
Europe O (2022) Open strategic autonomy. Available: https://openforumeurope.org/publication-open-
     strategic-autonomy/. Last visited 2022-06-29
Feller J, Fitzgerald B (2002) Understanding open source software development. Addison-Wesley London
Fielding RT (1999) Shared leadership in the Apache project. Commun ACM 42(4):42–43
Fitzgerald B, Kenny T (2004) Developing an information systems infrastructure with open source software.
     IEEE Softw 21(1):50–55
Foundation AS (2024) Briefing: The apache way. Available: https://www.apache.org/theapacheway/. Last
     visited 2024-10-10
Frey R (2023) How we lead successful open-source collaborations in the danish public sector. IEEE Softw
     40(4):19–24
Gerosa M, Wiese I, Trinkenreich B, Link G, Robles G, Treude C, Steinmacher I, Sarma A (2021) The shifting
     sands of motivation: Revisiting what drives contributors in open source. In: 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd
     International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pp. 1046–1058. IEEE
Gharehyazie M, Filkov V (2017) Tracing distributed collaborative development in apache software foundation
     projects. Empir Softw Eng 22:1795–1830
Gote C, Zingg C (2021) Gambit–an open source name disambiguation tool for version control systems. In:
     2021 IEEE/ACM 18th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR), pp. 80–84.
     IEEE
Hautamäki A, Oksanen K (2018) Digital platforms for restructuring the public sector. In: Collaborative Value
     Co-creation in the Platform Economy, pp. 91–108. Springer
Hoffmann M, Nagle F, Zhou Y (2024) The value of open source software. Harvard Business School Strategy
     Unit Working Paper (24-038)

                                                                                                123
80   Page 52 of 54                                                Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

Hollmann V, Lee H, Zo H, Ciganek AP (2013) Examining success factors of open source software repositories:
     The case of OSOR.eu portal. Intl Journal of Business Information Systems 14(1):1–20
Huysmans P, Ven K, Verelst J (2008) Reasons for the non-adoption of OpenOffice.org in a data-intensive
     public administration. First Monday 13(10):10
Kalja A, Kindel K, Kivi R, Robal T (2007) eGovernment services: How to develop them, how to manage
     them? In: Management of Engineering and Technology, Portland Intl Center for, pp. 2795–2798. IEEE
Koloniaris S, Kousiouris G, Nikolaidou M (2018) Possibilities of use of free and open source software in the
     greek local authorities. In: 14th IFIP WG 2.13 International Conference on Open Source Systems, pp.
     128–143. Springer
Kovács GL, Drozdik S, Succi G, Zuliani P (2004) Open source software for the public administration. In:
     Proceedings of the 6th Intl Workshop on Computer Science and Information Technologies
Krishnamurthy S (2002) Cave or community?: An empirical examination of 100 mature open source projects.
     First Monday
Kuechler V, Jensen C, Bryant D (2013) Misconceptions and barriers to adoption of foss in the us energy
     industry. In: IFIP International Conference on Open Source Systems, pp. 232–244. Springer
Li X, Zhang Y, Osborne C, Zhou M, Jin Z, Liu H (2024) Systematic literature review of commercial partici-
     pation in open source software. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology
Linåker J, Regnell B (2020) What to share, when, and where: balancing the objectives and complexities of
     open source software contributions. Empir Softw Eng 25(5):3799–3840
Linåker J, Runeson P (2020) Public sector platforms going open: creating and growing an ecosystem with open
     collaborative development. In: Proceedings of the 16th International Symposium on Open Collaboration,
     pp. 1–10
Linåker J, Rempel P, Regnell B, Mäder P (2016) How firms adapt and interact in open source ecosystems:
     Analyzing stakeholder influence and collaboration patterns. In: Requirements Engineering: Foundation
     for Software Quality: 22nd International Working Conference, REFSQ 2016, Gothenburg, Sweden,
     March 14-17, 2016, Proceedings 22, pp. 63–81. Springer
Linåker J, Regnell B, Damian D (2019) A community strategy framework-how to obtain influence on require-
     ments in meritocratic open source software communities? Inf Softw Technol 112:102–114
Linåker J, Papatheocharous E, Olsson T (2022) How to characterize the health of an open source software
     project? a snowball literature review of an emerging practice. In: Proceedings of the 18th International
     Symposium on Open Collaboration, pp. 1–12
Linåker J, Lundell B, Servant F, Gamalielsson J, Muto S, Robles G (2023a) Public sector open source software
     projects–how is development organized? arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06093
Linåker J, Nummelin-Carlberg A, O’Riordan C (2023b) Institutionalising support for open source software
     in the european public sector. (In publication). Directorate-General Informatics, European Commission,
     Brussels, Belgium
Linåker J, Link G, Lumbard K (2024) Sustaining maintenance labor for healthy open source software projects
     through human infrastructure: A maintainer perspective. In: Proceedings of the 18th ACM/IEEE Inter-
     national Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement
Lundell B, Amundsen M, Ghosh RA, Hardy JL, Sjöswärd PO (2009) Panel: Open source in the public sector.
     In: IFIP International Conference on Open Source Systems, pp. 368–369. Springer
Lundell B, Gamalielsson J, Tengblad S, Hooshyar Yousefi B, Fischer T, Johansson G, Rodung R, Mattsson A,
     Oppmark J, Gustavsson T, Feist J, Landemoo S, Lönroth E (2017) Addressing lock-in, interoperability,
     and long-term maintenance challenges through open source: How can companies strategically use open
     source? IFIP International Conference on Open Source Systems. Springer, Cham, pp 80–88
Lundell B, Gamalielsson J, Butler S, Brax C, Persson T, Mattsson A, Gustavsson T, Feist J, Öberg J (2021)
     Enabling oss usage through procurement projects: How can lock-in effects be avoided? In: IFIP Interna-
     tional Conference on Open Source Systems, pp. 16–27. Springer
Lundell B, Butler S, Fischer T, Gamalielsson J, Brax C, Feist J, Gustavsson T, Katz A, Kvarnström B,
     Lönroth E, Mattsson A (2022) Effective strategies for using open source software and open standards
     in organizational contexts: Experiences from the primary and secondary software sectors. IEEE Softw
     39(1):84–92. https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2021.3059036
Ma X, Zhou M, Mei H (2010) How developers participate in open source projects: a replicate case study on
     jbossas, jonas and apache geronimo. In: Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Replication
     in Empirical Software Engineering Research
Majumder S, Chakraborty J, Agrawal A, Menzies T (2019) Why software projects need heroes (lessons learned
     from 1000+ projects). arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09954
Marco-Simó JM, Pastor-Collado JA (2020) It outsourcing in the public sector: A descriptive framework from
     a literature review. J Glob Inf Technol Manag 23(1):25–52

123
Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80                                                Page 53 of 54   80

Miller GA (1956) The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing
     information. Psychol Rev 63(2):81
Mockus A, Fielding RT, Herbsleb J (2000) A case study of open source software development: the apache
     server. In: Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on Software engineering, pp. 263–272
Mockus A, Fielding RT, Herbsleb JD (2002) Two case studies of open source software development: Apache
     and mozilla. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) 11(3):309–346
Munaiah N, Kroh S, Cabrey C, Nagappan M (2017) Curating github for engineered software projects. Empir
     Softw Eng 22(6):3219–3253
Munir H, Mols CE (2021) The rise of open source program office. IT Professional 23(1):27–33
Munir H, Linåker J, Wnuk K, Runeson P, Regnell B (2018) Open innovation using open source tools: A case
     study at sony mobile. Empir Softw Eng 23:186–223
Nagle F (2019) Government technology policy, social value, and national competitiveness. Harvard Business
     School Strategy Unit Working Paper (19–103)
Nagle F (2022) Strengthening digital infrastructure: A policy agenda for free and open source
     software. Available: https://www.brookings.edu/research/strengthening-digital-infrastructure-a-policy-
     agenda-for-free-and-open-source-software/. Last visited 2022-06-29
Nakakoji K, Yamamoto Y, Nishinaka Y, Kishida K, Ye Y (2002) Evolution patterns of open-source soft-
     ware systems and communities. In: Proceedings of the international workshop on Principles of software
     evolution, IWPSE’02, pp. 76–85. ACM, Orlando, Florida
OSI (2022) State of open source survey. Available: https://opensource.org/ten-takeaways-from-the-2022-
     state-of-open-source-survey. Last visited 2022-06-28
Patton MQ (2014) Qualitative research & evaluation methods: Integrating theory and practice. Sage publica-
     tions
Persson P, Linåker J (2024) Soft-lockins in public sector acquisitions of open source software-solutions: A
     case study on a municipal e-service platform. In: Proceedings of the 58th Annual Hawaii International
     Conference on System Sciences, vol. 6, pp. 118a–118a. IEEE
Pinto G, Steinmacher I, Gerosa MA (2016) More common than you think: An in-depth study of casual contrib-
     utors. In: 2016 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and Reengineering
     (SANER), vol. 1, pp. 112–123 .https://doi.org/10.1109/SANER.2016.68
Raymond E (1999) The cathedral and the bazaar. Knowledge, Technology & Policy 12(3):23–49
Riehle D, Berschneider S (2012) A model of open source developer foundations. In: IFIP Intl Conf on Open
     Source Systems, pp. 15–28. Springer
Robles G, Gonzalez-Barahona JM (2005) Developer identification methods for integrated data from various
     sources. ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes 30(4):1–5
Robles G, Gamalielsson J, Lundell B (2019a) Setting up government 3.0 solutions based on open source
     software: the case of x-road. In: International Conference on Electronic Government, pp. 69–81. Springer
Robles G, Steinmacher I, Adams P, Treude C (2019b) Twenty years of open source software: From skepticism
     to mainstream. IEEE Softw 36(6):12–15
Saldaña J (2021) The coding manual for qualitative researchers. sage
Salkever A (2023) Open source maintainers. Available: https://www.linuxfoundation.org/research/open-
     source-maintainers?hsLang=en. Last visited 2024-10-10
Scanlon TP (2019) Critical factors for open source advancement in the us department of defense. IEEE Softw
     36(6):29–33
Shaikh M (2016) Negotiating open source software adoption in the uk public sector. Gov Inf Q 33(1):115–132
Synopsys (2020) Open source security and risk report. Available: https://www.synopsys.com/blogs/software-
     security/open-source-trends-ossra-report/. Last visited 2022-06-28
Tidelift (2018) Professional open source survey. Available: https://blog.tidelift.com/open-source-is-
     everywhere-survey-results-part-1. Last visited 2022-06-28
Tidelift (2024) The 2024 tidelift state of the open source maintainer report. Available: https://tidelift.com/
     open-source-maintainer-survey-2024. Last visited 2024-10-10
Van Loon A, Toshkov D (2015) Adopting open source software in public administration: The importance of
     boundary spanners and political commitment. Gov Inf Q 32(2):207–215
Ven K, Nuffel DV, Verelst J (2006) The introduction of openoffice.org in the brussels public administration.
     In: Damiani E, Fitzgerald B, Scacchi W, Scotto M, Succi G (eds.) Open Source Systems, IFIP Working
     Group 2.13 Foundation on Open Source Software, June 8-10, 2006, Como, Italy, IFIP, vol. 203, pp.
     123–134. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-34226-5_12
Yavuz EY, Barcomb A, Riehle D (2022) Problems, solutions, and success factors in the openmdm user-led
     open source consortium. Commun Assoc Inf Syst 51(1):13

                                                                                                 123
80   Page 54 of 54                                               Empirical Software Engineering (2025) 30:80

Zhang Y, Zhou M, Stol KJ, Wu J, Jin Z (2020) How do companies collaborate in open source ecosystems?
    an empirical study of openstack. In: Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 42nd International Conference on
    Software Engineering, pp. 1196–1208

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

Authors and Aﬃliations

Johan Linåker1 · Björn Lundell2 · Francisco Servant3 · Jonas Gamalielsson2 ·
Sachiko Muto1 · Gregorio Robles4

B Johan Linåker
     johan.linaker@ri.se
     Björn Lundell
     bjorn.lundell@his.se
     Francisco Servant
     fservant@uma.es
     Jonas Gamalielsson
     jonas.gamalielsson@his.se
     Sachiko Muto
     sachiko.muto@ri.se
     Gregorio Robles
     grex@gsyc.urjc.es
1    RISE Research Institutes of Sweden, Stockholm, Sweden
2    University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden
3    ITIS Software, Universidad de Málaga, Málaga, Spain
4    Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, Madrid, Spain

123