Ref. Ares(2026)933814 - 27/01/2026

Stackable Contribution to the Call for
Evidence: Towards European Open
Digital Ecosystems
Context / About Stackable
Stackable GmbH is a 20 person company based in Germany that builds and commercially
supports a fully open source data platform. Our software is used across finance, public sector,
and industrial environments globally.

We therefore respond from the perspective of a hands‑on open source producer and
maintainer, not as a policy or advocacy organisation. We are also engaged in the Expert Group
on Cybersecurity of Products with Digital Elements (E03967) as well as CEN/CENELEC and
advocate for SMEs and open source where we can.

Our perspective on open source
We do not treat open source as a separate category (as it is sometimes portrayed) of software,
nor primarily as a cost‑saving tool. We treat it as a software property or feature that enables
specific (highly valuable) behaviours:

   ●​ Improved debuggability: Full visibility into and access to the codebase makes
      diagnosing and fixing issues easier.
   ●​ Reduced vendor lock-in: Users can maintain, extend, or fork the software without
      dependence on a single vendor.
   ●​ Sovereignty: Long-term viability does not depend on external parties and especially not
      on the continued existence of a single vendor.
   ●​ Autonomy and agency: The ability to understand, modify, and evolve the software
      independently, with confidence in one’s own capacity to do so.

It is important to stress that open source is not primarily a cost-saving argument. It absolutely
can be under some circumstances but it is not a main driver.

Open source should be understood as digital infrastructure and a shared digital commons. It
forms the foundation on which further economic activity can happen and thrive. Open source
can drive innovation and economic growth. Like physical infrastructure, this shared foundation
requires continuous maintenance and investment.
Questions from the Call for Evidence

What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open source
sector?

Strengths

  ●​ Regulation: The Cyber Resilience Act is the first regulatory framework for cybersecurity
     in software - this includes provisions for open source software and components. The EU
     is leading here.
  ●​ Support infrastructure: Sovereign Tech Fund, NLnet, Digital Commons EDIC, FSFE,
     Eclipse Foundation, APELL and others show how successful support for open source
     financially or otherwise can look like and work and how we can learn from each other.
  ●​ Diverse ecosystem: Europe’s open source ecosystem is not dominated by a handful of
     big/global players. Instead, we have tens of thousands of small and specialised but
     successful companies (mostly SMEs) and projects, which increases overall resilience.
  ●​ Active community: Europe is home to a large community of developers involved in
     important open source projects. It is also host to important conferences and events (e.g.
     FOSDEM).
  ●​ Values: Many open source values align perfectly with the values baked into the EU:
     openness, transparency, sovereignty, privacy and more.

Weaknesses

  ●​ Marketing/Sales budgets: The downside of a diverse ecosystem is that the multitude of
     small vendors do not have budgets as big as those of the incumbent proprietary
     vendors.
  ●​ Fragmented landscape: No obvious “big players” makes procurement decisions harder.
  ●​ Usability/UX: Some open‑source solutions lag behind proprietary counterparts in UX,
     often due to chronic underfunding rather than technical limits.
         ○​ Proprietary software has been funded by the public and private sector for
            decades.
  ●​ Missing infrastructure: Still dependent on proprietary platforms like GitHub as well as
     CDNs and hyperscalers where no established alternative exists.
         ○​ In some cases it is hard to overcome the network effects.

(i) What are the main barriers that hamper(i) adoption and maintenance of
high-quality and secure open source?
   ●​ Public and private procurement: Public and private procurement often follow outdated
      rules and concepts which show a lack of understanding of how the open source world
      works (There are no “licenses” to buy, what do I pay for?).
   ●​ Playing it safe: “No one has ever been fired for buying X”.
           ○​ This leads to choosing familiar proprietary solutions even when superior open
               alternatives exist.
   ●​ It’s free: Open source is still often equated with “zero cost” and is sometimes incorrectly
      perceived as lower quality or unsupported software.
   ●​ Accessibility constraints: Some open source software was not designed from the start
      with accessibility requirements and regulations in mind.
   ●​ Missing support structure: Many organisations also lack internal structures (such as
      Open Source Program Offices) to manage dependencies, contributions, and long-term
      responsibility.

(ii) What are the main barriers that hamper sustainable contributions to
open source communities?

   ●​ Competition “anxiety”: Some companies fear that contributing upstream benefits direct
      competitors.
   ●​ Internal policies: Legal and compliance policies and uncertainties lead to a ban on
      contributions.
   ●​ It’s free: If something is perceived as free and low-value, organisations struggle to justify
      paying for contributions or maintenance.

What is the added value of open source for the public and private
sectors?
Most of these points have already been mentioned elsewhere:

   ●​   Reduced lock‑in and switching risk
   ●​   Transparency and auditability, improving security and compliance
   ●​   Shared knowledge base and easier skills transfer
   ●​   More predictable long‑term costs compared to license‑driven pricing

Concrete examples from our business
We provide a fully open source data platform that can be used to store, analyse, visualise, and
process data. It is used by both the public and private sectors. We have had many projects
funded by individual customers, which then immediately benefit users around the world.

A concrete example where open source is beneficial can be seen in various smart city projects
in Germany. Where publicly funded projects chose proprietary technologies, municipalities often
had to shut them down after funding ran out. This did not happen, at least not to the same
degree, with open source projects. These projects also enable forms of citizen science by
allowing members of the public to contribute at the local level, strengthening democratic
participation.

We increasingly see customers worried about geopolitical or commercial decisions by foreign
actors leading to sudden loss of access to critical infrastructure, and therefore actively looking
for open alternatives.

What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to
support the development and growth of the EU open source
sector and contribute to the EU’s technological sovereignty and
cybersecurity agenda?

   ●​ Lead by example: EU institutions should prioritise open source solutions in their own
      operations, even where migration is difficult. This is difficult, but achievable.
   ●​ Procurement reform: The Public Procurement Directive should explicitly recognise the
      benefits of open source and, where appropriate, prioritise it.
   ●​ Recognise open source as a public good throughout the EU: This helps avoid
      situations where it is unclear whether open source work qualifies as a public good or
      non-profit activity (e.g. the Matrix situation in Germany).
   ●​ Set realistic expectations: Open source alternatives cannot match decades‑funded
      proprietary products without sustained investment. We need to start investing today.

What technology areas should be prioritised and why?

   ●​   Core digital infrastructure (code hosting, repositories, collaboration platforms etc.)
   ●​   Real alternatives to the hyperscalers
   ●​   Identity, access management, and security tooling
   ●​   Public sector workplace and collaboration software (e.g. office alternatives) so the public
        sector can lead by example

In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to
increased competitiveness and cyber resilience?

We believe all sectors can benefit from open source. In particular:

   ●​ Critical infrastructure
   ●​ Public sector
   ●​ Healthcare
   ●​   Finance
   ●​   Energy
   ●​   Manufacturing
   ●​   Education

Summary
We thank the Commission for the opportunity to provide input into its future strategy. We believe
open source can and should play a crucial role for Europe. It is a powerful tool to achieve
sovereignty and resilience, and it also gives Europe an opportunity for economic growth by
building new businesses on open source and establishing itself as a global leader.

At Stackable, we’re always open to dialogue with the Commission and we invite you to reach
out to us should we be able to help.

Thank you!