Ref. Ares(2026)1028699 - 29/01/2026

    European Open Digital Ecosystem
               Strategy

                                Call for evidence

                                                 Statement
                Free Software Foundation Europe (FSFE)

WHAT IS FREE SOFTWARE?
    The core principles of Free Software (also known as Open Source) are
easy to explain: it refers to software that grants everyone the right to
use, study, share, and improve the programme for any purpose. When a
licence grants users these four freedoms, the software is considered Free
Software. In contrast, software that does not fully provide one or more of
these freedoms is referred to as "proprietary" software. Recognised lists
of licences are maintained by the Free Software Foundation 1 (FSF), the

1   https://www.gnu.org/licenses/license-list.html.en

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                         1
Open Source Initiative2 (OSI), and the Debian Project3.

    In the following text, the term "Free Software" is used, which is com-
monly synonymous with "Open Source".

STATUS QUO: THE STATE IN LOCK-IN
    A look at the current state of digitalisation reveals that administrations
in Europe are becoming increasingly dependent on proprietary software
providers, often from non-European countries. In Germany alone, nearly
€ 4.7 billion is being spent on software from the US corporation Oracle
under a single framework agreement for seven years. The US corporation
Microsoft is receiving € 1.3 billion through two framework agreements.
These figures exemplify the deep-seated dependencies that will only
become further entrenched over the next decade unless the state takes
strategic countermeasures.

    Dependency on individual proprietary providers prevents state sover-
eignty in the realm of digital infrastructures. Proprietary software does
not allow control over the core systems of our digital infrastructure.
Without the manufacturer, it is impossible to modify the software. This
becomes particularly critical in the event of security incidents or the
insolvency of the provider, leading to an erosion of trust in the state's
ability to act in the digital sphere. In the day-to-day operations of public
administrations, proprietary software proves to be an obstacle as well, as
it cannot be adapted to specific needs. Instead, the software primarily
serves the economic interests of the manufacturer, who may be target-
ing entirely different markets, rather than the strategic and technical
objectives of public sector procurement.

    Interoperability is often limited to the manufacturer’s own ecosystem.
Open standards and open interfaces are largely absent. There is no inter-
operability with open standards or interfaces that are compatible with
Free Software. For public administrations, this results in dependency on

2   https://opensource.org/licenses
3   https://wiki.debian.org/DFSGLicenses

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      2
the provider—in vendor lock-in.

   Research indicates that governments and public administrations con-
tribute up to 27% of software vendors’ revenue. However, this revenue is
predominantly generated by proprietary software from large technology
companies outside Europe. European companies that rely on Free Soft-
ware could make a decisive difference and enable greater independence,
but they often do not gain sufficient traction due to a lack of strategic
procurement and funding. Also often budgets are reserved for licences
instead of software in general – thus money could not spend for modifica-
tions or migrations but end up in licence fees.

   While awareness is growing in Europe that Free Software is essential
for achieving technologcial sovereignty, concrete efforts remain too hes-
itant or are entirely absent.

     THE PATH TO INDEPENDENCE THROUGH FREE
     SOFTWARE
   To successfully counteract the proprietary lock-in effects through Free
Software, a fundamental understanding of its possibilities and unique
characteristics is essential. The four freedoms—using the software for
any purpose, studying and understanding the code, modifying the soft-
ware, and sharing it as desired—are guaranteed by any Free Software
licence. Unlike proprietary software, no public funds need to be spent on
usage licences. Instead, resources could be spend for development,
maintenance, operations, and support – by procurement but also by sup-
porting with grants, funds or sponsorships. However, it is important that
those resources are spend in a secured and sustainable way, they should
stimulate markets but not subsidise. Until now, the Free Software ecosys-
tem often relies on one time support, leading to a permanently precari-
ous situation.

   Still, Free Software is everywhere, used by everyone, and distributed
by all—from billion-dollar corporations to small and medium-sized enter-

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      3
prises (SMEs), non-profit organisations, foundations, public administra-
tions, and individuals. The development of code is primarily driven by
SMEs, industry foundations, and large corporations working hand in hand
to integrate Free Software components into their organisations and
products. These components are found in our cars, refrigerators, televi-
sions, and state infrastructure. In this process, all stakeholders can inde-
pendently decide which competencies they wish to develop for various
components.

Public Administrations in the Free Software Ecosystem
   Public administration must navigate and operate within this complex
ecosystem, taking on various roles—whether as a contributor or main-
tainer, steward or producer, sponsor or user. Close and regular collabora-
tion between public administration, decision-makers, and relevant stake-
holders, particularly civil society, is therefore essential. The procurement
of Free Software inevitably leads to interactions with established
developers and developer communities who, while not market parti-
cipants in the traditional sense, still play a crucial role in the functioning
of the market. Strategically engaging with these communities and incor-
porating their perspectives into legislation and regulation is beneficial for
ensuring a secure and sovereign infrastructure.

   It is vital to ensure that responsibility lies with software manufacturers
and operators. They have an obligation to work fairly with the relevant
developers and their communities, providing them with the necessary
resources. Especially when public administration finds itself in one of
these roles or benefits from Free Software, beside procurement adequate
long-term funding must be made available to support developers and
their communities.

   State actors, public administrations, and decision-makers must build
and expand their understanding and capabilities to better engage with
and contribute to the Free Software ecosystem. There will always be situ-
ations where government institutions become part of projects, interact
and collaborate with them, or even take on a central role. In the global

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      4
Free Software ecosystem, different stakeholders cooperate in various
roles to ensure the proper functioning of technologies. These diverse
roles contribute to the resilience of the system, enabling independence,
transparency, security, and control.

   Additionally, the reusability of solutions for our society must be encour-
aged. The software available on code repositories like code.europa.eu
should benefit society as a whole, for example volunteer organisations—
helping entities such as voluntary fire brigades or education projects to
achieve digital sovereignty.

Technological Sovereignty
   Technological sovereignty means being able to use technologies inde-
pendently, securely, and with full control. Free Software is central to
ensuring long-term self-determination, transparency, and the ability to
act. With Free Software, all necessary resources can be procured inde-
pendently, and new requirements can be met quickly.

   Technological sovereignty empowers the state by providing solutions
that are neither platform- nor device-dependent. A crucial aspect is the
ability to run software on one’s own hardware, tailored to specific needs,
without relying on a single vendor. Early proceedings under the Digital
Markets Act reveal how far there is still to go: for example, Apple smart-
phone and tablet users are currently unable to install alternative app
stores due to Apple's role as a gatekeeper. Similar lock-in mechanisms
exist throughout many proprietary ecosystems. By consistently adopting
and procuring open standards, open interfaces, and Free Software, these
lock-ins can be avoided and bypassed.

   This strategic approach is essential for interoperability. It enables the
seamless exchange of data, improves cooperation between all users and
stakeholders, and reduces the burden on third-party organisations and all
users of digital technology. Applications and apps must be made avail-
able platform-independently, allowing them to be used without relying on
proprietary vendors. This also ensures that users are not forced to accept

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      5
restrictive terms of service, additional usage conditions, or the surrender
of personal data.

Transparency and Trust
   Trust in technology plays a crucial role in digitalisation, ensuring public
acceptance. Transparency, security, and especially the protection of per-
sonal data processed by the state are key factors in determining whether
people choose to use a technology or not. Transparent code makes it pos-
sible to understand how legal requirements in the area of data protection
are implemented, thereby enabling this trust to be established. Applica-
tions used in state infrastructure—whether in public administration, law
enforcement, or military institutions—must remain under the state’s con-
trol.    Free       Software         enhances           governance             capabilities          in    IT    and
strengthens the resilience of public-sector IT infrastructures.

Resilient Supply Chains
   The open nature of Free Software makes it widely accessible and
widely used. However, this openness can also lead to increasingly inter-
national and complex supply chains, which pose security challenges. The
sheer volume of projects means that components are often integrated
into new projects, which in turn depend on other projects. As a result,
security vulnerabilities can be difficult to track due to the existence of
multiple versions in circulation. Additionally, dependencies may arise on
projects that are no longer maintained or do not meet evolving needs.
However, Free Software allows tracking those supply chains. With propri-
etary software is significantly more difficult, if not impossible, to allow
this transparency.

MADE IN EUROPE?
   Free Software is cross-border and global. The development of the
Corona Tracing App demonstrated how international, multidisciplinary
teams can successfully collaborate on the development of applications to
provide solutions. In addition, volunteers from around the world have

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      6
modified the application so that it can be used on any platform. Also,
industries from around the world develop the Linux Kernel together and
thereby lay the foundation for every Linux operating system. Coordinated
and established workflows allow independence, reliability and sover-
eignty for all, at all times.

   For Free Software, a “made in Europe” or “buy European” approach
would undermine Europe's digital sovereignty, as it would be self-limiting.
Sovereignty is achieved through the consistent procurement of Free Soft-
ware with its four freedoms, not through geographical restrictions.
Instead, assessments on which software to use should focus on the
level/degree of sovereignty to be achieved and on where the software is
used within the infrastructure stack.

   However, the procurement and use of solutions and applications often
involves additional services such as hosting, support service and modific-
ations. Here in particular, providers from Europe should be relied upon,
and a focus should be on skills from Europe.

   Moreover, developments to date show that wherever Free Software is
procured in Europe, it is primarily European SMEs that benefit, mostly
from the region. Here, measures should be introduced to ensure that
even Microenterprises and non-traditional entities like charities can parti-
cipate in future.

   Consistent procurement of Free Software removes vendor-lock ins,
allows sovereignty and fosters a European Software market by default. A
limitation to “made in Europe” or “Buy European” is not needed, in con-
trary, it would limit European paths to technological independence. The
focus should be on strengthening skills in Europe and enabling micro
enterprises, charities and foundations alike to participate in processes in
order to contribute to European sovereignty.

SECURITY THROUGH FREE SOFTWARE
   Free Software is not inherently more secure than proprietary software,

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      7
but it offers numerous advantages that make it significantly easier to
enhance security. One benefit is the ability to inspect and modify the
code externally without contractual hurdles or vendor dependencies—
this can be done as needed, without requiring approval from the manu-
facturer or supplier. The right to modify software to fit specific needs also
includes the ability to identify and patch security vulnerabilities, without
dependencies.              Since       Free       Software          code       is     publicly        accessible,
developers have an incentive to produce high-quality, well-documented
code, as their reputation extends beyond a single project. Because the
code is public and developers can make a name for themselves beyond
their project with good work, the quality and documentation of the code
in Free Software is often significantly better than in proprietary products.
This makes it easier to check the manufacturer's innovations and pre-
vents a manufacturer from introducing unwanted functions. The flawed
concept of "security through obscurity" has been discredited through
security scandals.

   However, the openness of Free Software also leads to forks, where pro-
jects split into different directions. Such forks are not a cause for concern
but instead foster agility, innovation, and competition. That said, some
forks may exploit the freedoms of Free Software for less democratic pur-
poses. For instance, when the conspiracy and hate speech platform
"Truth Social" forked from the wider Fediverse, many Fediverse server
operators actively chose not to integrate with it, maintaining ethical and
technical control over their networks. Similarly, dubious Linux distribu-
tions from Russia do not—and should not—find a place in European pub-
lic sector infrastructure. Ensuring that such code does not enter public
administration or critical enterprises is a also matter of procurement
policy and supporting measures like secured long-term funding for the
Free Software ecosystem.

   Still, Free Software development is global. Developer communities that
ensure code security must be actively supported. This can only be
achieved through close collaboration with these communities and civil
society actors. The COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated how quickly and

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      8
effectively these communities can respond when given the necessary
resources. Advisory bodies, expert groups and channels for stakeholders,
should be well-balanced and include actors from civil society to represent
diverse expertise. Additionally, sustainable communication channels
between stakeholders should be established and supported. To minimise
friction, governments and institutions should seek to better understand
and adapt to the established workflows of Free Software communities.

THE CHALLENGE OF OPENWASHING
   As public administrations increasingly adopt Free Software, cases of
Openwashing are becoming more frequent. Openwashing refers to prac-
tices and strategies used by companies, organisations, or projects to cre-
ate the misleading impression that they develop, offer, or support Free
Software. It is a form of deceptive marketing aimed at gaining market
advantages.

   Openwashing poses a significant threat to the control and transparency
of technical infrastructures, including those used by public administra-
tions. It dilutes the clear definition of Free Software, creating an illusion of
openness and control while actually increasing dependency on propriet-
ary systems and vendors. This contradicts the goal of digital sovereignty
and creates confusion around the term.

   Public administrations and IT service providers must understand the
role of Free Software in achieving digital sovereignty and set a good
example by avoiding Openwashing themselves. When public funds sup-
port Openwashing, it undermines digital sovereignty, damages public
trust in government and democracy.

   Administrations must be able to distinguish Free Software from propri-
etary solutions. This requires legal and technical expertise or good
advice. Wrong decisions in favour of supposedly open solutions lead to
dependencies, higher costs and limited control. They damage trust in
Free Software, cause long-term additional costs for taxpayers and make
efficient budget auditing more difficult.

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                      9
   Authorities and governments should engage with civil society organisa-
tions on topics such as Free Software procurement, licensing, interoper-
ability and Openwashing to build expertise and transfer this knowledge
into public administration. Establishing reliable infrastructures can help
mitigate risks. To combat Openwashing effectively, public procurement
must include clear criteria to identify and penalise deceptive practices
early. The entire procurement process should take Openwashing into
account, evaluating factors such as a vendor’s market position, commu-
nication practices, and past behaviour. Procurement decisions should
always prioritise vendor independence, ensuring that switching providers
remains possible. Monitoring openwashing cases and facilitating whis-
tleblowing enable transparency and learning effects.

   To avoid confusion, the state should steer clear of terms frequently
used by openwashers, such as "Enterprise Edition" or "enterprise-ready".
Instead, Free Software should be presented to public administrations
under terms like "administration-ready", ensuring clarity in its intended
use.

PUBLIC MONEY? PUBLIC CODE!
   Many of the advantages mentioned can be leveraged, and most of the
challenges addressed, if future procurement follows a different approach
—one that strategically aims to promote digital sovereignty through Free
Software. The principle of “Public Money? Public Code!” must be estab-
lished as a guiding principle: Code procured with public funds must be
made available under a Free Software licence, for example, via
code.europa.eu. Instead of further entrenching dependence on individual
vendors, Free Software must be procured. It is essential to acquire soft-
ware that can be adapted to specific needs and that ensures full control
over digital infrastructures—also in the long term. If software is procured
that does not meet these criteria, this must be publicly justified in writing
and audited by the Court of Auditors. By making software available on
code.europa.eu, administrations can procure, customise, and deploy soft-
ware ad hoc, without lengthy procurement processes. This not only helps

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                    10
maintain government operational capability during (IT) crises but also
contributes to reducing bureaucracy in public procurement.

   Cross-border collaborations can be leveraged to develop digitally sov-
ereign alternatives, ultimately leading to medium- and long-term cost
savings. Free Software is designed with users in mind—rather than pro-
curing proprietary software filled with unnecessary features that public
administrations do not need, Free Software procurement ensures that
solutions are tailored to actual needs and requirements.

   With the implementation of the Interoperable Europe Act but also when
reforming the procurement system, it will be crucial to align processes
and regulations to genuinely enable interoperability through open stand-
ards and interfaces without harming the Free Software ecosystem.
Secure, innovative technology emerges through collaboration and
cooperation.

   Public administrations must redefine their role, keeping the needs of
their users in focus and using procurement as a tool to gradually reduce
dependency. Existing financial resources should be strategically directed
toward Free Software, ensuring sustainable innovation, strengthening
Europe’s IT sector, and benefiting society as a whole. Additionally, migra-
tion plans toward Free Software must be developed from a strategic per-
spective, with viable alternatives built and deployed. Users should be
actively involved in these efforts via code.europa.eu.

   Finally, establishing alternative solutions strengthens the negotiating
position of public administrations in procurement processes—even when
dealing with large companies that have historically held dominant market
positions and used them to set prices on their own terms.

FREE SOFTWARE AS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR SOCIETY
   The consistent pursuit of the “Public Money? Public Code!” principle,
the targeted implementation of the Interoperable Europe Act (IEA) and
the Cyber Resilience Act (CRA), as well as the allocation of resources to

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                    11
Free Software, bring spill-over effects that benefit the state, the eco-
nomy, and society beyond the direct advantages already mentioned. In
addition to breaking up market concentration that hinders innovation and
gaining greater independence, which benefits all market participants,
fundamental rights are also strengthened. Resilient and trustworthy soft-
ware supports journalists in their work, enhances transparency and con-
trol, and ensures compliance with legal requirements, particularly in
areas such as privacy and data protection. Free Software can also enable
and strengthen participation in the digital age—for instance, through
applications like Consul or Decidim, which help integrate citizens into
decision-making processes, or by reducing barriers and designing pro-
grammes and services inclusively. Such projects in particular require act-
ive support, including exploring unconventional funding mechanisms—as
demonstrated by the City of Munich, which has supported Free Software
initiatives through sponsorship programmes.

Sustainable Education for the Professionals of Tomorrow
   Studies show that the consistent procurement and financial support of
Free Software leads to an increase in business start-ups and employment
in the sector, particularly among small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs) in local regions. In addition to strengthening the SME sector, Free
Software drives innovation and research while enabling young people to
develop deep technical expertise and a self-determined approach to
technology from an early age.

   In the education sector in particular, the focus should not be on
product training but rather on teaching fundamental technological skills,
underlying concepts, and the ability to shape technology. This approach
helps spark interest early on, develop digital competencies, and address
the long-term shortage of skilled professionals.

   It is important to prevent students from being forced into the ecosys-
tems of proprietary manufacturers with their restrictions and lock-in
effects through specifications and proprietary software at schools. Stu-
dents should have the freedom to use software of their choice for school-

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                    12
related tasks—without being forced to accept proprietary licences or
being prevented from installing alternative Free Software applications
that could enhance productivity and improve learning outcomes.

   Schools should be supported in the implementation of a future digital
education strategy that utilises Free Software as a working tool and is
aimed at the sovereign use of technology. Extracurricular learning pro-
grammes of this kind should also be promoted in view of the shortage of
skilled workers, especially in the municipal sector.

   The procurement of Free Software will lead to spill-over effects, which
will also lead to the development of expertise and skills, which will coun-
teract the shortage of skilled workers and enable innovation in the
European Union. The same is true for a secured long-term funding for the
Free Software ecosystem. Those who benefit from Free Software should
also contribute. A private-public fund should be set up the allow secured
long-term funding for Free Software that is important for all users and
stakeholders. To identity such software, all stakeholders and in particular
civil society actors should be involved in the decision making process.

Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. (FSFE) • Head office: Schönhauser Allee 6/7, 10119 Berlin, Germany
Phone: +49/30/27595290 • E-mail: office@fsfe.org • Web: http://fsfe.org • President: Matthias Kirschner • Registered: VR
17030, AG Hamburg
                                                                                                                    13