Ref. Ares(2026)1213903 - 03/02/2026

                                                  On
                               Building Capacity and Capability for
                                 Open Source and Civic Software
                               Sustainability and Digital Sovereignty
                                              in Europe

I would like to personally thank the Commission for this opportunity to provide feedback and
evidence on the strategic open source strategy that is developed. I would like to focus on one
very narrow aspect - that of capacity and capability building -- of ensuring that the Europe of
Tomorrow has what it needs to maintain and further the digital infrastructure it so crucially relies
on in general, and by extension its open digital ecosystem.

And to make this practical - I would like to do this in the form of a very practical proposal -- the
creation of the Jacquard Grant. That 1) exposes students to Open Source and Standards
widely, 2) creates an European Open Source Excellence Centre (EOSEC) to work on
OpenSource & Civic Software that 3) allows a smaller group of academic students to get
hands-on experience in open source to prepare them in their career and 4) provides Europe
with a strategic knowledge capture on the open source that is crucial to a modern, open and
democratic, society.
                                               Summary

In short -- Europe is getting behind on generating the Capacity and Capability needed to sustain
the Open Source, the Digital Commons and related Civic software needed by society. Upcoming
legislation, such as the CRA, NIS2, PLD and DORA only make this need more pressing - we
simply lack the people and skills.

To build the required capacity and capability - this proposal for the Jaquard grant as a key
element of the European Open Digital Ecosystems strategy is to ensure that at least 1% of
graduates in Europe that enter the workplace in IT in 2025, shall have made a meaningful &
sustainable contribution to open source software that makes up 95% of the software used at a
European- or a National-institution or is in common use at EU-SMEs.

The Jacquard grant consists of 5 interlocking elements that address this issue at its core:

    1.​ A travel & subsistence grant for any student1 to attend a known open source conference2
        in the EU once during their study;
    2.​ A grant for any student in the last 2 years of their study to present a talk or poster at up
        to three such conferences;
    3.​ An opportunity to train and undertake work experience of 3 months, on-site, at any
        European Open Source Excellence Centre (EOSEC) to work on OpenSource & Civic
        Software; with grant covering travel & subsistence;
    4.​ One or two such EOSEC centres staffed by established “open source developers in
        residence” on a one-year secondment/fellowship and;
    5.​ A set of operational tasks (such as nightly builds, bug fixing, integration tests,
        maintenance) at EOSEC that help build European Sustainability and Digital Sovereignty
        with regard to open source software in general and civic software in particular - and does
        so by contributing to the existing global open source efforts.

1
  Intentionally not limiting this to STEM students; for example; a UI/UX or graphics designer,
documentation/language specialist, cyber-forensics, or accountant/lawyer (e.g. as currently so key to our
ISO-27001 & audit space that the CRA further drive) is just as valuable.
2
  To be clarified as FOSDEM, Libre&Fête, esLibre, foss4g-it, DevConf-Brno, FrOSConf, etc (some
sensible subset of https://foss.events/ with > 250 participants & opensource.org aligned)
                                              Context

Society, and especially democratic society, is increasingly dependent on open standards and
open source software3. Over 95% of the software that `runs’ in Europe is open source. Open
Source software underpins virtually everything: from being the core of the internet to transport,
news, governments, taxes, education, water, sewage and energy.

Open Source software is maintained by a loose, global, coalition of volunteers and companies.
With open source software now nearly half a century old, the question of sustainability and
ensuring sufficient capacity and capability in society to maintain and further this digital commons
becomes important.

The first two generations of Open Source creators are now retiring, just as society's reliance on Open
Source software has reached an enormous scale. And this reliance is starting to exceed both the
capacity and capability being fed into the market by the European educational system.

And this is made more complex by modern IT not just needing STEM engineers; but also
requiring a deep understanding of open source by, for example, auditors, security, forensic,
legal- and cyber-experts. Along with a growing reliance in the embedded, manufacturing and
IoT market on open source adding demand.

Secondly - increasingly, society is placing new demands on this loose, global, coalition of
volunteers and companies that exceed the current informal frameworks (e.g. the CRA).

Thirdly - increasingly law and regulation is embodied in code. And with that - the ability of a
democracy to be sovereign is increasingly dependent on the substrate of (open source)
software being conducive to implementing a democratic vision. This requires code to be
conceived and maintained within that same culture and vein.

It is therefore essential for Europe to create not just centers of excellence with knowledge
-about- open source; but to also start pro-actively stabilizing, maintaining and securing those
parts of the digital commons that matter to it; and with processes informed by the needs of
Europe. In general; but also specifically for civic software. As the latter is generally so unique
that it does not command a commercial market of its own.

The Jacquard grant tries to address a subset of this problem; that of creating, and ensuring
Europe’s access, to additional capacity and capability at the root; during that inflection moment
in which young professionals start to specialize.

3
 Hoffmann, Manuel and Nagle, Frank and Zhou, Yanuo, The Value of Open Source
Software (January 1, 2024). Harvard Business School Strategy Unit Working Paper No.
24-038, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4693148 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4693148
                             The Jacquard Programme - in 5 actions

For this the following 5 actions are proposed:

#1 - Integrate a new generation into the global network that maintains the internet

While modern STEM education often uses free- and open source software -- it does not expose
students to the culture and network that is key to open source software and the internet. An
informal, yet key professional network, that is of importance for both 1) the students professional
career and 2) for Europe its command of sufficient resources to keep shaping open source
software.

For this reason - the programme is to provide a travel & subsistence grant for any student to
attend a well-known open access, open source conference once during their study. (Note that
key open source conferences in Europe; such as FOSDEM, are often gratis (in general or for
such students).

In practical terms - this is envisioned as a simple capped4 travel and per diem payment paid
post event. With a `stamp’ or some similar face to face contact at a Jacquard Booth (or parallel
event) at the conference. This face to face element is to be in a position to help create an influx
of 'funnel’ for activity 3 -- the capture of talent for the summer schools.

#2 - Build the next generation of leaders

For a small group of students (typically in STEM in general, and computer science, AI and
cyber-studies in particular) it is essential that they are able to present the fruits of their work;
new innovation and ideas, not just to the academic community as research - but also to the
wider community where it has direct impact on new technology and where it can be applied.
And where they can build a personal network which allows them to participate in open-source &
disseminate that innovation.
​
So this aspect of the proposal is to provide this group with a path to implementing their
(academic/university originating) innovation and ideas directly - and (as these conferences are
generally EU-SME dominated) disseminated directly to the industry.

In practical terms - this programme would likely feed into activity 5 (support of the EU
infrastructure) -- with a copy of the paper, post or presentation submitted for 'open access’ to
European Open Source Excellence Centre (EOSEC); and with the latter doing annual or
quarterly publications and statistics on this.

4
  E.g. absolute; or simply as a fixed amount per km between domicile/place of learning of the student &
the event.
And this would also serve as a source, of funnel, for staff at the OESEC in activity #4 (the
creation of a centre of excellence); to provide the needed bench-strength and long term stability
to the `open source developers in residence’ (much like post-grads and post-doc are currently
cycled on capped, 1-3 year contracts through, for example, European Institutions such as the
Joint Research Centres, ESA, ENBL, ESO, ESRF/ILL, EFDA or ENISA).

#3 - Build Capacity and Capability - for industry and society

Few, if any students (even those studying computer engineering), get much exposure to actual,
professional, at-scale, processes and methods of internet-scale software engineering.

Yet it is that very skill that society (and future) employers clamor for. Even if a future employer is
small or an SME - it is essential for their staff to understand open source, at-scale, software
engineering; in order to select and maintain the myriad of software that SME relies on. Skills
which the SME does neither have access to; and is too small to build in-house.

Open Source software provides an opportunity for such students5 to directly, and meaningfully,
participate in these types of processes. And get, at the tail end of their study, first hand
experience with the best-of-breed / industry best practices that permeate the software industry
(and where Europe generally is behind the curve). And in this way - enter the market better
prepared; helping uplift (SME and) industry.

For this - the programme should provide an opportunity to train and undertake a practical work
experience of at least 3 months, on-site, at any European Open Source Excellence Centre
(EOSEC) to work on OpenSource and Civic Software; with grant covering travel & subsistence.

The reason for the on-site aspect is that in Software Engineering, building capacity and
capability is first and foremost a human effort; highly reliant on social and human interaction. It
needs a relatively large group of people that intensively cooperates and collaborates; with a
very fast feedback loop. This is also the reason for keeping the number of sites (initially) limited;
to get sufficient scale at those sites.

It also allows for things such as having a steady flow of appearances and presentations by well
known engineers or scientists; not so much for knowledge transfer; but for inspiration and
thought leadership.

The practical work will typically focus on things such as maintenance, bug fixes, security fixes,
build and test automation, automated tests, audits, documentation and other relatively
junior/entry tasks. That requires both a bulk effort (something that is hard to sustain delivery in
an open source community - and hence welcome) and a long term stable commitment with

5
 It may be attractive/appropriate to offer this to a slightly wider group of young people - e.g. those that are
under the age of 30 and have had at least 3 years of work experience developing software; but never
attended a formal education in a relevant field.
regard to resources and maintenance (again; something hard to build in a volunteer open
source community).

In practice; this system would likely consist of batches of students for 3 or 6 months blocks of
time (with a 50% overlap); with the EOSEC providing a simple distance based travel stipend at
start and finish, housing and a small per diem. Ideally the location would be attractive; but not
distracting -- e.g. it should be such that students are likely to stay near and interact with each
other, form a network that furthers their future career -- both during `office hours’ and outside.

#4 - Capture, Sustain and Further existing Capacity and Capability

Both the internet, and the open source that developed in tandem, is now about half a century
old - and- has grown from a small effort to something that permeates almost all economic
endeavors. This age means that the initial two or three generations of volunteers are rapidly
becoming unavailable. And with that, structured access to their knowledge, experience and
ability to maintain the international open source community. And secondly - it means that the
number of people needed to keep sustaining this growing software stack, is only growing.

For this reason - this programme tries to capture as much knowledge and experience from the
existing open source experts - and transfer this on to the next generation. It does this by staffing
the European Open Source Excellence Centre (EOSEC) with established “open source
developers in residence” on a year (or max 2 years) secondment/fellowship (much like existing
temporary research fellowships at the EU’s institutions).

And then having these fellows work with the students during their 3 month practical work period
on the very open source they are an expert in. Thus introducing these students into the social
network, culture, habits, technology and dynamics of `their’ open source projects. And ensuring
that the work done by students is meaningful, furthers the fields and help build European
capacity and capability in a new generation.

#5 - Strategic support for European Sustainability and Digital Sovereignty

While open source methodologies and its `volunteering’ culture have served the industry well --
there is a large set of key, long term, activities that are not well suited to a loose cadre of
engineers. Such as automated testing, validation, verification, fixes of small bugs, release
packaging, menial-improvements, cleanups and so on. And if these are done - they are
currently typically funded by (big) tech industry. Against a set of needs, requirements and
commercial strategic realities which are not necessarily aligned with long term needs, the needs
of Europe and the use of open source in civic software.

Secondly - there is a dearth of knowledge in Europe as to what open source is used in general,
and, more specifically, know which open source software is key to our economic and democratic
processes.
So the final prong of the Jacquard programme is to strategically support the needs of open
source in Europe. By identifying needs (in particular of national and local public institutions); and
creating things such as nightly tests, builds, implementations of regulation and so on. And pair
this with activity 3 (so students get meaningful, actual, production experience) making use of the
expertise from activity 4.

Over time - as regulation and legislation increasingly becomes `code’ -- it is likely that this will
include the open source needed for cross border legislation. With an additional focus on
maintaining things like taxonomies and transformations needed in the medical,
travel/car/transport and GIS world. All things that are key to not yet well maintained in Europe in
a collective way.

It is likely that this is also conducive to implementing things such as Cyber Resilience Act and
the GDPR.