Open Source Sweden, Stockholm, 2026-01-28​              ​
                                                                                           Ref.
                                                                                         Ref.   Ares(2026)69111 -- 06/01/2026
                                                                                              Ares(2026)1208723    03/02/2026

                                        CALL FOR EVIDENCE

  TITLE OF THE INITIATIVE        Towards European open digital ecosystems

   LEAD DG – RESPONSIBLE         Directorate-General for Communications Networks, Content and Technology
             UNIT                (DG CNECT) – Unit E.3: Future Internet
                                 Directorate-General for Digital Services (DG DIGIT) – Unit B.2: Interoperability
                                 and Digital Government

  RESPONDING                     Open Source Sweden (Föreningen Leverantörer av Öppen Programvara i
  ORGANIZATION                   Sverige)

  ABOUT US                       We are an association for suppliers of Open Software in Sweden. Our
                                 organization was formed to protect the interests of Swedish suppliers. Our
                                 purpose is to promote a well-functioning national and international market for
                                 the development, sale, delivery and support of open software and services. A
                                 market comprising both private and public organisations.

                                 Open Source Sweden is a member of APELL (The European Open Source
                                 Software Business Association).

  Our response

Dear officers of the EU Commission,

Here follows Open Source Sweden’s response to your call for evidence. Our response reflects our member
companies’ experiences on these topics.

  1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector? What are
  the main barriers that hamper (i) adoption and maintenance of high-quality and secure
  open source
  ​
  Main barriers identified are (in no specific order):
    ●​ Procurement processes mainly looking to short term procurement costs, ignoring longer term costs
        related to lock-in and life cycle management - areas where Open Source solutions delivers exceptional
        value
    ●​ Sourcing requirements discriminating against open source solutions by being written to best fit specific
        proprietary solutions
    ●​ Sourcing requirements making it impossible for open source solutions to answer ‘yes’ to specific
        questions
    ●​ Sourcing requirements make it impossible for open source solutions to respond to RFIs or RFQ, for
        example by using language incompatible with open source, often related to licensing and ownership of
        the software.
    ●​ Lack of harmonization of certifications and standardizations - The Open Source innovation system is
        global, so when EU or country level requirements differ from global standards that works against how
        this ecosystem functions.
    ●​ Lack of public sector open source strategy, such as public money - public code.

  ​
  ​
  (ii) sustainable contributions to open-source communities?
Open Source Sweden, Stockholm, 2026-01-28​                ​

Main barriers identified are (in no specific order):
    ●​ Lack of requirements for upstream contributions in procurement processes
    ●​ Lack of public sector strategy for contributing to open source projects (employment contracts commonly
       do not allow contributions, it’s rare that public sector employs developers in open source projects)

  2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors? Please
  provide concrete examples, including the factors (such as cost, risk, lock-in, security,
  innovation, among others) that are most important to assess the added value.

Key value add for open source identified are (in no specific order):
    ●​ Decreased cost (as open source works promotes competition)
    ●​ Decreased lock-in (as the source code is open, more open standards are used and more exit options
       exists)
    ●​ Increased innovation (the Open Source ecosystem consists of hundreds of millions of open source
       projects)
    ●​ Increased agency for organizations, corporations and countries.
    ●​ Increase public benefits by creating a positive feedback loop of increased use and knowledge of open
       source which contributes to increased agency and resilience for EU digital societies.

  3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support the
  development and growth of the EU open-source sector and contribute to the EU’s
  technological sovereignty and cybersecurity agenda?

Concrete measures and actions identified as tearing down barriers to adoption, which includes (in no specific
order):
    ●​ Procurement processes mainly looking to short term procurement costs, ignoring longer term costs
        related to lock-in and life cycle management - areas where Open Source solutions delivers exceptional
        value
    ●​ Sourcing requirements discriminating against open source solutions by being written to best fit specific
        proprietary solutions
    ●​ Sourcing requirements making it impossible for open source solutions to answer ‘yes’ to specific
        questions
    ●​ Sourcing requirements make it impossible for open source solutions to respond to RFIs or RFQ, for
        example by using language incompatible with open source, often related to licensing and ownership of
        the software.
    ●​ Lack of harmonization of certifications and standardizations - The Open Source innovation system is
        global, so when EU or country level requirements differ from global standards that works against how
        this ecosystem functions.
    ●​ Lack of public sector open source strategy, such as public money - public code.

  4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why?

Technology areas to be prioritized are (in no specific order):
    ●​ Basic infrastructure and platforms related to building public and private cloud (operating systems,
       orchestration, automation, networking, application and database platforms) - as it would help EU reduce
       lock-in to US cloud companies
    ●​ Cryptography and PKI - as these are core security areas which are also hard requirements for most
       trustworthy IT solutions
    ●​ Artificial Intelligence - as it is an important emerging area

  5. In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to increased
Open Source Sweden, Stockholm, 2026-01-28​           ​

    competitiveness and cyber resilience?
​
Our member companies can not identify any sector where increased open source would not lead to increased
competitiveness and cyber resilience. With that said, specific sectors our member companies have observed
positive effects in includes (but are not limited to, in no specific order):
    ●​ Public sector
    ●​ FSI
    ●​ Retail
    ●​ Media
    ●​ FMCG
    ●​ Transportation
    ●​ Defence
    ●​ Energy

                                                                                                            4