T R OY V I T U L L O
                                                                        Ref. Ares(2026)1122862 - 31/01/2026
                          720-300-3045 | troy@troyvit.com | LinkedIn

T O W A R D S E U R O P E A N O P E N D I G I TA L E C O S Y S T E M S

Full post on my blog.

What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector?

Many aspects of an open source digital infrastructure already exist in Europe, from
system services like Linux and KDE, cloud services like NextCloud and Penpot,
infrastructure services like bunny.net, and powerful AI solutions like Mistral.

The biggest weakness is scale. Open alternatives to Google Workspace are a good
example: they are up against a product funded by an organization with a yearly
revenue rivaling the GDP of Finland.

What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors?

Open source projects give the public a say in the shape of the tools they use. In
education the tools themselves become a lesson, because students can take them
apart and learn how they work. Integrating open source throughout the education
system gives students a deeper understanding of the technology they use.

The private sector is beholden to the owners of the closed source tools that they rent
or buy. That means everything from unilaterally changed licenses to data exfiltration
to corporations and governments. Open source helps ensure that the private sector
owns its software instead. Open source also provides a chance for the private sector
to participate in the commons while at the same time affecting the course of the
development of the tools it uses.

What can the EU do to support the development and growth of the EU open-
source sector and contribute to the EU’s technological sovereignty and
cybersecurity?

Support universities and embrace the U.S. brain drain

The EU is already providing a safe haven for U.S. university researchers. It can extend
that. Put them to work using and developing open source through research grants,
software development infrastructure and extended education programs.
Scale infrastructure

Build the open, sovereign digital cloud that Europeans deserve. Amazon recently
announced the “AWS European sovereign cloud”, not because they believe that they
can deliver sovereignty to another polity but because they fear that Europe can do it
without them. Europe’s digital infrastructure can come from within by leveraging
what it already has and investing in interoperability between existing cloud providers.

Support open information

Google and Cloudflare offer free protection services like Project Galileo and Project
Shield to at-risk enterprises like news-rooms and human rights organizations. They
can also take those protections away at the whim of a CEO. Europe can subsidize
the same thing through companies like bunny.net and back those protections up.

Fund the bits that hold it all together

There are hundreds of invisible open source libraries that we all use every day, and
most of us don’t know it. They are the backbone of the world’s digital infrastructure
and need social and financial support. It is a matter of security for EU to help fund
and build communities for many of these isolated projects.

Create truly open AI

   1. Incentivize EU AI companies to release more open models by making deals to
      integrate them into European Commission projects

  2. Tie AI expansion to sustainable energy sources. When building out physical
     digital infrastructure keep AI front in center in thinking, especially in terms of
     environmental impact.

  3. Use AI to fight AI. The same principles disinformation actors use to create
     discord can be used to detect and fight it. Integrating open AI tools into
     Europe’s battle against disinformation creates accountability and builds trust.

What technology areas should be prioritised and why?

   1. Open source libraries

  2. AI

  3. Collaboration suites

  4. Interoperability

  5. Open federated social tools
In what sectors could an increased use of open source lead to increased
competitiveness and cyber resilience?

  1. Public sector

  2. University research

  3. Defense: Operations Security (OpSec), anti-disinformation, OS intelligence

  4. Journalism and truth-telling

  5. Social media