Ref. Ares(2026)1207884 - 03/02/2026

Val Markovic
Zagreb, Croatia
25th January 2026.

                                                                       European Commission
                                                                       DG CNECT (Unit E.3) and
                                                                       DG DIGIT (Unit B.2)

Feedback on Initiative “Towards European open digital ecosystems”

Reference: Ares(2026)69111

Stakeholder Background & Expertise
I am submitting this feedback in my capacity as a Software Engineer and Open Source Contrib­
utor based in Croatia. My perspective is informed by a career dedicated to building the types
of scalable, mission-critical digital infrastructures that the Commission identifies as vital for EU
technological sovereignty.

After completing my BS and MS in Computer Science at the University of Zagreb, I spent 15 years
in Silicon Valley as an engineer and technical lead at Google, Meta, Microsoft, and LinkedIn.
In these roles I was responsible for setting technical strategy in departments of hundreds of
engineers and leading the development and maintenance of software systems generating tens of
billions of dollars in annual revenue. All of these systems heavily utilized open source software.

Additionally, as an active member of the open source community for over 25 years, I have
contributed to dozens of projects and have created and maintained open source software utilized
by millions of users. [1], [2]

Having returned to the EU, I am deeply interested in helping the initiative’s goal to “support the
development and growth of the EU open source sector and contribute to the EU’s technological
sovereignty and cybersecurity agenda”. [3]

I declare no relevant conflicts of interest. Specifically, I maintain no financial relationships with
any US-based technology companies or their subsidiaries.

                                                 1
Response to Question 3
I want to focus my feedback on the third question posed in the Commission’s Call for Evidence:

Question 3: What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support the
development and growth of the EU open source sector and contribute to the EU’s technological
sovereignty and cybersecurity agenda?

I propose several concrete measures and actions.

Provide an EU equivalent to the brilliant German Sovereign Tech Fund, opening an avenue
for open source software (OSS) projects that directly benefit the EU to seek EU funding. Require
that all such projects license their code under strong copyleft licenses like the GPLv3, AGPLv3,
and the EUPL. Require open governance structures. Ensure that the economic value created
through public funding remains available to the public.

Create an EU version of Google Summer of Code. Such a program would provide additional
monetary rewards for open source contributions to projects that fit the EU’s desired open source
focus areas (cybersecurity, EU technological sovereignty and similar). Determine a list of key
open source projects the EU would wish to see more contributions to. Publish a call for proposals
from OSS maintainers working in these focus areas and explicitly invite the identified projects
to participate in the program. Do not limit the program only to students, but reserve a portion of
funding exclusively for students to support the next generation of OSS contributors. Model the
EU program after Google Summer of Code which is widely regarded and known to work well.

Create a publicly funded EU R&D Laboratory to produce open source software for public
benefit. It would be similar to the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) and the
European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), but focused exclusively on producing open
source software the EU needs and which the private sector does not believe to be profitable
enough to invest in.

The US government funds Department of Energy National Laboratories and Technology
Centers [4]. These are predominantly focused on R&D for “national security” (largely nuclear
weapons), but they also significantly contribute to open source. The EU’s equivalent institution
would instead focus entirely on open source software.

The EU has no problem investing billions of euros in funding CERN and the EMBL for unprof­
itable yet societally valuable scientific research; development of open source software benefiting
the EU should be no different. The private sector will not fund open source R&D that improves
the security of our energy grid or the resilience of our communication networks. The EU must.

Since all software produced by such an R&D institution would use the European Union Public
Licence (EUPL) [5], private institutions could freely extend, contribute back to and ultimately

                                                2
profit from its development. Red Hat, Inc. makes billions of dollars in yearly revenue selling
software based on and built around the open source Linux kernel. [6]

Unlike CERN and the EMBL, such an EU open source R&D institution would produce output
through its work (critical OSS infrastructure) that would directly economically benefit EU
companies and citizens, boosting economic growth.

This institution would be an attractive destination for the EU’s brightest young software
engineers, reducing brain drain and improving the EU’s talent competitiveness. They would
further develop their skills and roots in EU communities, likely resulting in their permanent
commitment to the region.

Mandate that all projects receiving EU funding must publish all created software under
copyleft open source licenses (GPLv3, AGPLv3, and the EUPL). This would directly improve
cybersecurity because EU citizens could inspect the source code and report security issues at no
additional cost to the EU. It would also spur innovation because other EU citizens and companies
could extend the software to support new initiatives and use cases. Due to copyleft licenses, these
changes would also be contributed back to the public, creating a virtuous cycle of improvement
and value creation that is common in open source.

Mandate that private software stores support publishing, distributing and installing soft­
ware without requiring approval from the store operator. Current mobile store practices
from Google and Apple are a direct and present danger to EU technological sovereignty. Today
it is not possible to publish software (open source or proprietary) for Apple’s mobile devices
(iOS) without Apple’s explicit approval of each application. Google’s Android supports installing
software without using Google’s Play Store (which they pejoratively call “sideloading”), but
Google is actively working on making this process “high friction” [7] with the obvious goal of
eventually preventing it altogether. Google (and Apple) take a cut of all app distribution through
their stores; the ability to distribute apps without using Google’s app store is a “missed revenue
opportunity”.

The exclusive control US tech giants exert over mobile app distribution is fundamentally
incompatible with EU technological sovereignty and cybersecurity.

Since these companies are under US jurisdiction, if any EU citizen, company or government
institution decided to publish any software the US government found undesirable, the EU would
have no recourse. If the US government mandated the removal of an application from mobile
app stores, Google and Apple would be forced to comply.

Imagine the next global pandemic happens and an EU public health institution wants to publish
an app urging vaccination. Are we certain the current US government wouldn’t object? Would
we be willing to wager EU public health on it?

                                                3
While the Digital Services Act is a step in the right direction, it does not take away the power
of US tech giants to a priori decide which software can be published for their platforms. While
Google and Apple say their tight control over app distribution is required for user security, this
is a false dichotomy that happens to align with their economic interests.

The open source Linux desktop operating system experiences fewer security breaches than
Google’s and Apple’s proprietary mobile operating systems without mandating prior, centralized
approval of all software. Linux does optionally provide centralized app distribution through
built-in package managers, but users are free to install software from any source. Clearly, strong
platform security does not require centralized software approval.

The desktop computing market does not have this problem. While proprietary software stores
exist for these platforms, their usage is not mandatory. Anyone can publish an application for
Windows, macOS or Linux without requiring approval from a for-profit corporation.

Had the desktop computing market followed the path of the mobile computing market where all
app distribution is controlled by monopolistic for-profit corporations, the open source software
movement would have never formed.

Since the desktop computing market share is declining as younger generations shift to mobile-
only lifestyles [8], we must act now to reclaim technological sovereignty and improve EU
cybersecurity or risk becoming permanent technological vassals of the United States.

Mandate the ability to install alternative operating systems on all mobile devices sold in
the Union. Through cryptographic methods, Apple makes it impossible for the average user to
replace the iOS operating system on their mobile device. [9] It is possible (though very difficult)
to do so on Google’s Android mobile devices, but Google is making it increasingly difficult. [10]

This too is fundamentally incompatible with EU technological sovereignty and cybersecurity
because Apple and Google have the ability to remotely force the removal or installation of
any app on iOS and Android (respectively), including forcing installation of new operating
system versions. If a US court order demanded US tech giants remove an app the US government
dislikes (even if the app was developed in the EU and published exclusively for the EU market),
Apple and Google would be forced to comply.

Future US legislation could force Apple and Google to forcibly deploy an operating system
update for their mobile platforms that contains security backdoors for exclusive use of the
US Intelligence Community. The EU would have no ability to prevent deployment of such an
update, no way to remove it and no alternative operating system to install on these devices.

There are communities willing to provide alternative, open source operating systems for these
platforms. GrapheneOS is one such example [11] and exists only because Android is open source.
It is significantly more secure and private than Google’s version of Android. [12]

                                                4
Mandating the ability to install alternative operating systems on all mobile devices would directly
benefit EU technological sovereignty, cybersecurity and innovation. Open source implementa­
tions of mobile operating systems would be able to compete with proprietary ones like they can
on the desktop market. Increased competition would lead to better products, more innovation
and lower prices for EU citizens.

Conclusion
Recent geopolitical developments have highlighted the risks of the EU’s dependence on US-
controlled technology. The open source software movement has the will and the ability to
provide solutions to this problem, but it’s hampered in this mission by several factors:

• Lack of regulation mandating US tech giants allow easy installation of alternative oper­
  ating systems on their mobile devices which are the future of personal computing. This must
  change if the EU is to develop any meaningful technological sovereignty. Rent-seeking for-
  profit corporations will not willingly give up tight control of these platforms as it is simply too
  profitable; Apple’s Services gross profit margin reached a record 76.5% in the first quarter of
  fiscal 2026. [13] Such eye-watering margins do not exist in competitive markets and are only
  possible through monopolistic market domination.
• Lack of regulation mandating all projects receiving EU funding publish all created soft­
  ware under copyleft open source licenses. EU citizens are paying for this software, yet it
  remains locked away from the public. This is detrimental to the EU’s cybersecurity, innovation
  and economic growth.
• Lack of EU funding for critical open source projects that benefit the public. The EU should
  apply successful funding models that directly or indirectly fund open source projects, like the
  German Sovereign Tech Fund, Google Summer of Code and the US Department of Energy
  National Laboratories. It should also apply institutional funding models like CERN and the
  EMBL to open source R&D. All such funding must require the software to be published under
  copyleft licenses so that the public can durably benefit from its investment.

Respectfully,

                                                                                    Val Markovic

                                                 5
Bibliography
[1]   S. V. Markovic, “Sigil (application).” [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sigil_
      (application)
[2]   S. V. Markovic, “YouCompleteMe.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ycm-core/
      YouCompleteMe
[3]   European Commission, “Towards European open digital ecosystems,” Ares(2026)69111, Jan.
      2026.
[4]   United States Department of Energy, “National Laboratories and Technology Centers.” [On­
      line]. Available: https://www.energy.gov/national-laboratories
[5]   European Commission, “European Union Public Licence.” [Online]. Available: https://eupl.eu/
[6]   W. Chen, “Red Hat Enterprise Linux Revenue Statistics,” Dec. 23, 2025. [Online]. Available:
      https://commandlinux.com/statistics/red-hat-enterprise-linux-revenue-statistics/
[7]   A. Sharma, “Google confirms 'high-friction' sideloading flow is coming to Android,” Jan. 18,
      2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.androidauthority.com/google-sideloading-android-
      high-friction-process-3633468/
[8]   “Desktop vs Mobile vs Tablet Market Share Europe,” Feb. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://gs.
      statcounter.com/platform-market-share/desktop-mobile-tablet/europe#monthly-200901-202601
[9]   Apple Inc., “Boot process for iPhone and iPad devices,” Feb. 18, 2021. [Online]. Available:
      https://support.apple.com/en-gb/guide/security/secb3000f149/web
[10] A. Li, “Google says Android Open Source Project not being 'discontinued' amidst Pixel change
     impacting custom ROMs,” June 12, 2025. [Online]. Available:
     https://9to5google.com/2025/06/12/android-open-source-project-pixel-change/
[11] GrapheneOS Contributors, “GrapheneOS.” [Online]. Available: https://grapheneos.org/
[12] GrapheneOS Contributors, “GrapheneOS.” [Online]. Available: https://grapheneos.org/features
[13] Apple Inc., “FY26 Q1 Consolidated Financial Statements,” Jan. 2026. [Online]. Available:
     https://www.apple.com/newsroom/pdfs/fy2026-q1/FY26_Q1_Consolidated_Financial_
     Statements.pdf