Ref. Ares(2026)1204109 - 03/02/2026

VNG input on The European Open Digital Ecosystem Strategy
consultation
2 February 2026

About the VNG
The Association of Netherlands Municipalities (VNG) is the advocacy organisation and knowledge
platform for all Dutch municipalities. The goal of the VNG is to unite the strengths of municipalities
and collectively act in the interest of local government and its residents. We achieve this by exerting
influence at the national level and placing societal challenges at the forefront. Together, we ensure
a strong and resilient local government.

Position on open-source software
VNG sees open-source software as a strategic enabler of digital autonomy, interoperability, and
public values for local governments across Europe. Municipalities are committed to reducing vendor-
lockins, enabling flexibility and reducing costs by facilitating re-use. This is in part organised via
Common Ground. Common Ground is an information management vision and architecture paradigm
that transforms municipal information provision from a closed, application-oriented landscape into
an open, data-driven, and component based flexible system. Municipalities are working together to
develop shared information models and components using the open-source paradigm. The Haven
standard is a part of Common ground and open source. It constitutes a platform-independent cloud
hosting framework that defines technical criteria and best practices for running Kubernetes-based
infrastructure. Hereby it provides platform- and supplier-independent cloud services. Additionally,
within the GIBIT 2025 municipal IT procurement standards, open source is introduced as the default
approach for custom software where appropriate. Municipalities are, in government-wide
cooperation, striving towards and are committed to open-source solutions and are applying open
standards that strengthen digital autonomy and sovereignty.

     1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the EU open-source sector? What are
        the main barriers that hamper (i) adoption and maintenance of high-quality and
        secure open source; and (ii) sustainable contributions to open-source
        communities?
        Strengths:

               •    Growing public-sector interest with possibilities to create critical digital
                    infrastructures without vendor lock-ins and undesirable dependencies.
               •    Solid research base
               •    Increasing policy alignment on interoperability, cloud & AI and sovereignty.

          Weaknesses:

               •    Management issues such as lack of certified support chains, insufficient resources
                    for lifecycle management (patching, audits), and missing common security
                    baselines. For example, if an open-source component is used without an active
                    maintainer or clear update cycle, this may result in non-compliance with Nis2
                    requirements.
               •    There is currently a skills gaps in public sector namely, municipalities.
               •    Procurement demands, for several reasons, insufficiently facilitate open-source
                    solutions. Within procurement processes closed products often come out on top.
               •    Open-source success stories are being bought up by foreign companies/investors.

Vereniging van Nederlandse Gemeenten                                                                 1/3
Nassaulaan 12 Den Haag | Postbus 30435 | 2500 GK Den Haag
070 - 373 83 93 | info@vng.nl | vng.nl
    2. What is the added value of open source for the public and private sectors? Please
       provide concrete examples, including the factors (such as cost, risk, lock-in,
       security, innovation, among others) that are most important to assess the added
       value.
       The use of open standards and open‑source reference implementations for data exchange
       between municipalities and national services reduces vendor lock‑in and increases the
       ability to switch between vendors. This in turn incentivizes competitiveness and innovation.
       It also promotes the reuse of solutions across municipalities and across different levels of
       government. This creates a more interoperable, flexible, and future‑proof digital ecosystem.
       For municipalities, open source is not a goal in itself, but a strategic tool to:

            •   strengthen digital autonomy,
            •   protect public values,
            •   operate agilely and future-proof,
            •   reduce costs and accelerate innovation,
            •   and improve collaboration within government.

    3. What concrete measures and actions may be taken at EU level to support the
       development and growth of the EU open-source sector and contribute to the EU’s
       technological sovereignty and cybersecurity agenda?
       From the viewpoint of Dutch municipalities, several concrete EU‑level measures would
       significantly strengthen the EU open‑source ecosystem, reinforce technological
       sovereignty, and improve cybersecurity across local governments. Municipalities rely on
       interoperable, secure, and sustainable digital public infrastructure. The EU can play a crucial
       role in enabling this by:

            •   Establishing long-term, structural EU funding for open digital infrastructure and
                ensure municipalities can directly benefit from such funding streams, not only
                national authorities or research institutions. This should facilitate a shared catalogue
                of reusable digital building blocks and reference architectures.
            •   Supporting cross‑border municipal collaboration through shared open‑source
                components and digital commons (for example via EDICs and NGI initiatives). This
                contributes to interoperable European digital ecosystems for public services.
            •   Invest in European-led auditing and certification of open-source software used in
                public administration. Research shows that many critical OSS projects depend on
                only one or two unpaid maintainers, creating cybersecurity vulnerabilities.
                Municipalities require secure building blocks to reduce local cybersecurity risks.
            •   Create an EU‑wide procurement and compliance framework that favors open
                source. Municipalities often struggle with procurement rules that unintentionally
                favor closed solutions.
            •   Strengthen the European open-source skills and community ecosystem. Facilitate
                support for cross‑European developer communities and open‑source competence
                centres. Local governments benefit when skills and maturity improve across the
                continent.
            •   Proactively research the risk AI poses to the open-source sector and act accordingly
                in order to protect the use of open-source technologies within the public sector.
            •   Contribute to researching different governance and management forms such a
                steward ownership or the beehive model, for the public sector. Concrete examples
                of undesirable acquisitions exist.

    4. What technology areas should be prioritised and why?

Vereniging van Nederlandse Gemeenten                                                               2/3
        Dutch municipalities primarily want to improve their digital autonomy on the following layers
        of the technology stack: Artificial Intelligence (AI), Data, Software, Cloud technology (SaaS,
        PaaS, and IaaS) and Connected devices and sensors such as cameras,
        traffic sensors, or energy meters. However, municipalities operate on a smaller scale and
        do not have the capacity nor the oversight to influence the lower layers of the tech stack
        and therefore look to the national government and the EU specifically, to advocate on
        promoting less dependency on Networks, Chips and Critical Resources.

    5. In what sectors could an increased use of open-source lead to increased
       competitiveness and cyber resilience?
       The concern for undesirable dependencies and vendor lock-ins exists mainly in the public
       sector because it provides critical public services. There is growing concern for the risks
       that come with not being able to make strategic decisions on ICT that enable municipal
       service delivery. Healthcare, energy & utilities, mobility/transport, and education form
       essential parts of the public sector. The digital infrastructure required for this should not be
       subject to external interests but should be under the control of the government and
       municipalities. Therefore, the use of open source combined with a uniform governance
       framework and funding, is particularly desirable for the public sector.

Vereniging van Nederlandse Gemeenten                                                              3/3