Ref. Ares(2026)139127 - 07/01/2026

Feedback to EC on OSS
Written by Zenna Elfen.

First off, thank you for opening up the conversation on this challenging topic, for it is a
collective learning process Europen societies and open-source communities are facing, and
dialogue is essential.

This paper is organized in two parts. The first part is the macro perspective, touching on the
larger strategic implications for EU in times of change, it also touches on open-source and it's
relation to digital sovereignty in Europe and the unique qualities the European flavor of digital
sovereignty enables, rooted in autonomy and collaboration. The second part consists of a
Micro perspective with concrete suggestions, recommendations and concerns.

Macro Perspective

Times of transitions
The world is facing times of change and, if navigated well, transitions. After a few centuries of
extractive systems in human society, we are now facing the consequences. Through tense
political climates (backlash from our history of colonialism, degradation of soil and resource
extraction) and an increasingly volatile ecological climate(1), the world is approaching chaotic
times. The silver lining can be found in the potential of chaos to bring about change and new
systems of organizing.

As complexity theorists, such as Brussel based Heylighten, have highlighted, a self-organizing
system (such as social movements (2), the internet (3) or market economies (4)) often find it
very difficult to break out of established orders of organizing, yet there is a catalyzing factor of
chance: chaos.

Navigating chaos is no easy task, and for monolithic and centralized systems, it is often the
definition of their end. Europe, with it's many diverse cultures, languages and nation-states,
carries potent potential: plurality.

Plurality of Approaches
In times of pressure and concern of dependency on US and Chinese tech giants, the EU has
taken a stance for digital sovereignty (which was far from a given in the past (5)) and is now
spearheading this societal transformation through terms such as resilience, interoperability,
digital commons and open-source. The approaches as to how this transformation towards
digital sovereignty should occur and what it means are diverse.

Factions are forming around the next steps for EUs stance on open-source, such as EuroStack
who are emphasizing change through mobilizing industry to build a European Tech Stack
(developed by creators of the report "the European Way" (6)) or the Open Internet Stack
which centers open-source while supported by the Next Generation Internet in their final
statement with backing from APELL. Another initiative, Gaia-X, a joint effort by Germany and
France, take matters in their own hands by building a tech-stack for digital sovereignty
through federation, interoperability and open-source.

Denmark, who currently hold the presidency of the EU, have been equally (if not more)
conflicting in their approach. While on one hand promoting Digital Sovereignty and Security in
their official statement to danish citizens (7) one of the main goals have been to push through
legislation—unofficially known as ChatControl—resulting in uproar from open-source
enthusiasts and danish citizens with nearly 60,000 signatures against the proposal in denmark
with equivalent critique all across Europe.

This plurality of approaches is precisely why the European stance on digital sovereignty
stands out on the global stage. Compared to the Chinese or Russian approaches, European
digital sovereignty leans on the interoperability of a multitude of sovereign digital
infrastructures, enabled by open-source licenses.

The paradox of digital sovereignty in juxtaposition with open-cooperation is itself an
embodiment of European values of respecting multiplicity, yet the the social dilemma of how
to accommodate co-existing sovereignties still persists (5).

Multiplicity as strategy
From an organizational perspective, a plurality of approaches, while in dialogue across the
network, is known as Antifragility (8). Not only is it one of the most resilient forms of
organizing, but even better, it's an adaptive form of organizing, meaning that a network which
has many different actors can learn from the failures and successes of one another, as long as
there is also active communication and dialogue.

The challenge of moving away from Big Tech developed by China or the US is that we are
accustomed to their one-stop-shop solutions where everything is in one neatly packed
package and we must buy it all in one go for it to work properly, locked-in, as well provided for
consumers.

To adopt multiplicity as a strategy we actively choose to tear down the walls of technical lock-
in and instead enable interoperability. The challenge here is not technical, it is cultural. We are
used to having a single package to open for a whole suite of products. The interoperable way
means that we have options and a multitude of smaller providers.

The most difficult aspect of organizing a system with many smaller autonomous actors, such
open-source ecosystems, is that there is no absolute central control. Instead, the system self-
manages through local actions which ripple into global system-wide impacts. Arguably, the
question the EC now sits with is: How do we enable the local actors to move in an open-
source direction? The answer is much like a riddle, one enables the local-actors related to
open-source to self-organize, more.

Micro Perspective
The following is a focused list of concrete suggestions for the EC and the EU, while also
relevant for any nations or municipalities. The list covers a large variety of topics related to
open-source and is in no particular order.

Recommendations
 1. Strengthen the open-source technology stack that already exists, thanks to the NGI
    initiative.
    There are 1500 projects sponsored by NGI so far, many of them are existing modules in
    open-source ecosystems. The networks are already there, and started thriving.

 2. Legal entity legislation for open-source
    Legislate the ability to establish legal entities which match the long-term safeguarding
    needs of open-source licenses. Examples are Post Growth Entrepreneurship and strict
    Stewardship models, see work by Dr. Melanie Rieback.

 3. Lead by example. Be the change.
    By adopting open-source infrastructures within the EU, nations and municipalities see
    what is possible. Self-host or hire self-hosting organizations. Replace Big Tech solutions
    with open-source solutions: video-calls, knowledge bases, communication channels and
    more.

 4. Support local connections & physical spaces
    Local communication happens in physical spaces. Local problems require local solutions.
    Real collaboration and weaving of networks occurs in person: in libraries, hackerspaces,
    conferences, makerspaces & communal centers.

 5. Distinctions of Licenses copyleft vs BSD-licenses
    There are two main types of open-source licenses, BSD-licenses and copyleft (9). Each
    type serves its purposes, copyleft licensing (such as AGPL) is ideal for the purpose of
    safeguarding core infrastructure from becoming co-opted by proprietary incentives.
    Copyleft licenses are ideal for infrastructure developed by public funding or for the digital
    commons. BSD-licensing (such as MIT) is suitable when the developing source want to be
    able to build a proprietary company on top of the code, usually at a later point, and to put
    it bluntly, quite awful for public infrastructure.

 6. Enable the Many and Small
    A common issue in the IT space of Europe is that once a project becomes big and
    successful enough, it gets bought up by Big Tech. The european strategy for IT is through
    open-source which enables many small initiatives collaborating rather than having to grow
    into large companies. Supporting the many and small leads to thriving ecosystems of
    interoperability.
    This also applies for technical solutions. Modularity and compostability of software
    enables ecosystems to thrive, with low entrance cost and low-maintenance cost for
    developers.

 7. Communication Structures
    The communication infrastructure permeates all of society and all sectors. Emphasizing a
    shift towards federated, interoperable P4P communication infrastructures(10) enable
    technical communication ecosystems which are robust, adaptable and resilient.

 8. Document, documen, document
    The Digital Commons European Digital Infrastructure Consortium (DC-EDIC) is a great
    potential for this. All digital public infrastructure should be well documented and
    information about it should be accessible. Interoperability is a social issue as well as
    technical and knowledge exchange is imperative. I learnt this from a professor at MIT, Niel
    Gershenfeld, as it is essential for open-source in general.

Cautions
Open-source development by proprietary companies.

    Handing over large funds to companies to build open-source when they themselves aren't
    open-source is a tragedy. It leads to diluted values and poor-results, commonly through
    license changes which impact entire open-source ecosystems. An industry led path of
    open-source is one of more of the same, yet we need change.

Risk of top-down approach

    Applying a top-down approach of frameworks to "professionalize" or apply a pre-
    constructed idea of how open-source projects should organize or present leads not only
      to a loss of legitimacy in open-source contexts but also lacking engagement from open
      source communities.

About this paper
This perspective on Open-Source in the EU comes from my own involvement in Open-Source
for the past 15 years, as well as in NGI over the past 6 years; first as a beneficiary via NGI
Pointer and later working with NGI Search and the wider NGI community in collaboration with
NLnet. I have personally hosted around 12 community workshops for the NGI community, been
part of many discussions and taken in perspectives from a large variety of voices. Additionally,
as a researcher at Aarhus University in Denmark, my work has focused on open-source and
organizing, leading to insights in the differing approaches and societal implications of both
open-source and organizing.

Author: Zenna Elfen

Email: the.zelf@pm.me

Date: 07/01 - 2026

References
 1.

Calvin K, Dasgupta D, Krinner G, Mukherji A, Thorne PW, Trisos C, et al. IPCC, 2023: Climate
Change 2023: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Sixth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, H.
Lee and J. Romero (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland. [Internet]. First. Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC); 2023 Jul [cited 2024 Feb 29]. Available from: https://
www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/

 2.

Fuchs C. The Self-Organization of Social Movements. Systemic Practice and Action Research.
2006 May 11;19(1):101–37.

 3.

Fuchs C. The Internet as a Self-Organizing Socio-Technological System. SSRN Journal
[Internet]. 2003 [cited 2024 Apr 26]; Available from: http://www.ssrn.com/abstract=458680
     4.

Ashraf Q, Gershman B, Howitt P. Macroeconomics in a Self-Organizing Economy: Revue de
l’OFCE [Internet]. 2012 Nov 2 [cited 2026 Jan 7];N° 124(5):43–65. Available from: https://
www.cairn.info/revue-de-l-ofce-2012-5-page-43.htm?ref=doi

     5.

Celeste E, Fabbrini F, Quinn J. Data Protection Beyond Borders: Transatlantic Perspectives on
Extraterritoriality and Sovereignty [Internet]. Hart Publishing; 2020 [cited 2026 Jan 6].
Available from: http://www.bloomsburycollections.com/book/data-protection-beyond-borders-
transatlantic-perspectives-on-extraterritoriality-and-sovereignty

     6.

Zenner K, Berjon R, Caffarra C, Bonfiglio F, Toffaletti S, Chivot E, et al. The European Way. A
Blueprint for Reclaiming Our Digital Future [Internet]. SSRN; 2025 [cited 2026 Jan 6].
Available from: https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=5251254

7.

Denmarks 2026–2029 national digitalisation strategy. Available from: https://www.digmin.dk/
Media/638852231268539953/Digitaliseringsstrategi%202026-2029.pdf
Developed by: digmin.dk, kl.dk, regioner.dk. Sammen griber vi de digitale muligheder.
Taskforce for Kunstig Intelligens; 2025.

     8.

Taleb NN. Antifragile: things that gain from disorder. Random House trade paperback edition.
New York: Random House; 2016. 519 p. (Incerto / Nassim Nicholas Taleb).

     9.

Lin YH, Ko TM, Chuang TR, Lin KJ. Open Source Licenses and the Creative Commons
Framework: License Selection and Comparison. 2006.

10.

Elfen Z. P4P: Steps Toward more Adaptive Internets: charting Open-Source, P2P and Local-
First Networks. 2024; Available from: https://works.hcommons.org/doi/10.17613/naj7d-6g984